29899996
Biallelic mutations of EGFR in a compound heterozygous state cause ectodermal dysplasia with severe skin defects and gastrointestinal dysfunction
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor that recognizes epidermal growth factor, is a very important regulator of cell proliferation and differentiation. To date, three cases of severe ectodermal dysplasia were reported to be caused by an inherited germline homozygous loss-of-function missense mutation of EGFR. This is the first report of a patient with biallelic compound heterozygous mutations in EGFR.

33326033
Germline EGFR variants are over-represented in adolescents and young adults (AYA) with adrenocortical carcinoma
Adrenocortical Carcinoma (ACC) is a rare endocrine tumor with poor overall prognosis and 1.5-fold overrepresentation in females. In children, ACC is associated with inherited cancer syndromes with 50-80% of childhood-ACC associated with TP53 germline variants. ACC in adolescents and young adults (AYA) is rarely due to germline TP53, IGF2, PRKAR1A and MEN1 variants. We analyzed exome sequencing data from 21 children (<15y), 32 AYA (15-39y), and 60 adults (>39y) with ACC, and retained all pathogenic, likely pathogenic, and highly prioritized variants of uncertain significance. We engineered a stable lentiviral-mutant ACC cell line, harboring an EGFR variant (p.Asp1080Asn) from a 21-year-old female without germline-TP53-variant and with aggressive ACC. We found that 4.8% of the children (P = 0.004) and 6.2% of AYA (P < 0.0001), all-female participants, harbored germline EGFR variants, compared to only 0.3% of the control group. Expanding our analysis to the RTK-RAS-MAPK pathway, we found that the RTK genes have the highest number of highly prioritized germline variants in these individuals amongst all three arms of this pathway. We showed EGFR mutant cells migrate faster and are characterized by a stem-like phenotype compared to wild type cells. While EGFR inhibitors did not affect the stemness of mutant cells, Sunitinib, a multireceptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, significantly reduced their stem-like behavior. Our data suggest that EGFR could be a novel underlying germline predisposition factor for ACC, especially in the Childhood-AYA (C-AYA) population. Further clinical validation can improve precision oncology management of this disease, which is known to have limited therapeutic options.

29625052
Pathogenic Germline Variants in 10,389 Adult Cancers
We conducted the largest investigation of predisposition variants in cancer to date, discovering 853 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 8% of 10,389 cases from 33 cancer types. Twenty-one genes showed single or cross-cancer associations, including novel associations of SDHA in melanoma and PALB2 in stomach adenocarcinoma. The 659 predisposition variants and 18 additional large deletions in tumor suppressors, including ATM, BRCA1, and NF1, showed low gene expression and frequent (43%) loss of heterozygosity or biallelic two-hit events. We also discovered 33 such variants in oncogenes, including missenses in MET, RET, and PTPN11 associated with high gene expression. We nominated 47 additional predisposition variants from prioritized VUSs supported by multiple evidences involving case-control frequency, loss of heterozygosity, expression effect, and co-localization with mutations and modified residues. Our integrative approach links rare predisposition variants to functional consequences, informing future guidelines of variant classification and germline genetic testing in cancer.

27900366
Exome sequencing reveals germline gain-of-function EGFR mutation in an adult with Lhermitte-Duclos disease
Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD) is a rare cerebellar disorder believed to be pathognomonic for Cowden syndrome. Presently, the only known etiology is germline PTEN mutation. We report a 41-yr-old white female diagnosed with LDD and wild-type for PTEN. Exome sequencing revealed a germline heterozygous EGFR mutation that breaks a disulfide bond in the receptor's extracellular domain, resulting in constitutive activation. Functional studies demonstrate activation of ERK/AKT signaling pathways, mimicking PTEN loss-of-function downstream effects. The identification of EGFR as a candidate LDD susceptibility gene contributes to advancement of molecular diagnosis and targeted therapy for this rare condition with limited treatment options.

24691054
Epithelial inflammation resulting from an inherited loss-of-function mutation in EGFR
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is fundamentally important for tissue homeostasis through EGFR/ligand interactions that stimulate numerous signal transduction pathways. Aberrant EGFR signaling has been reported in inflammatory and malignant diseases, but thus far no primary inherited defects in EGFR have been recorded. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a homozygous loss-of-function missense mutation in EGFR (c.1283 G>A; p.Gly428Asp) in a male infant with lifelong inflammation affecting the skin, bowel, and lungs. During the first year of life, his skin showed erosions, dry scale, and alopecia. Subsequently, there were numerous papules and pustules--similar to the rash seen in patients receiving EGFR inhibitor drugs. Skin biopsy demonstrated an altered cellular distribution of EGFR in the epidermis with reduced cell membrane labeling, and in vitro analysis of the mutant receptor revealed abrogated EGFR phosphorylation and EGF-stimulated downstream signaling. Microarray analysis on the patient's skin highlighted disturbed differentiation/premature terminal differentiation of keratinocytes and upregulation of several inflammatory/innate immune response networks. The boy died at the age of 2.5 years from extensive skin and chest infections as well as electrolyte imbalance. This case highlights the major mechanism of epithelial dysfunction following EGFR signaling ablation and illustrates the broader impact of EGFR inhibition on other tissues.

26436111
EGFR mutations cause a lethal syndrome of epithelial dysfunction with progeroid features
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is part of a large family of receptors required for communicating extracellular signals through internal tyrosine kinases. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling is required for tissue development, whereas constitutive activation of this signaling pathway is associated with oncogenic transformation. We identified homozygous c.1283G>A (p.Gly428Asp) mutations in the extracellular domain of EGFR in two siblings. The children were born prematurely, had abnormalities in skin and hair, suffered multisystem organ failure, and died in the neonatal period from intestinal perforation. EGF failed to induce mutated receptor phosphorylation in patient-derived fibroblasts and activation of downstream targets was suppressed. The heterologously expressed extracellular domain was impaired in stability and the binding of EGF. Cells from the affected patient undergo early senescence with accelerated expression of β-galactosidase and shortened telomeres at all passages when compared to controls. A comparison of homozygous inherited regions from a separate report of a patient from the same ethnic background and EGFR genotype confirms the pathogenicity of EGFR mutations in congenital disease.

31589614
Optimizing clinical exome design and parallel gene-testing for recessive genetic conditions in preconception carrier screening: Translational research genomic data from 14,125 exomes
Limited translational genomic research data have been reported on the application of exome sequencing and parallel gene testing for preconception carrier screening (PCS). Here, we present individual-level data from a large PCS program in which exome sequencing was routinely performed on either gamete donors (5,845) or infertile patients (8,280) undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment without any known family history of inheritable genetic conditions. Individual-level data on pathogenic variants were used to define conditions for PCS based on criteria for severity, penetrance, inheritance pattern, and age of onset. Fetal risk was defined based on actual carrier frequency data accounting for the specific inheritance pattern (fetal disease risk, FDR). In addition, large-scale application of exome sequencing for PCS allowed a deep investigation of the incidence of medically actionable secondary findings in this population. Exome sequencing achieved remarkable clinical sensitivity for reproductive risk of highly penetrant childhood-onset disorders (1/337 conceptions) through analysis of 114 selected gene-condition pairs. A significant contribution to fetal disease risk was observed for rare (carrier rate < 1:100) and X-linked conditions (16.7% and 41.2% of total FDR, respectively). Subgroup analysis of 776 IVF couples identified 37 at increased reproductive risk (4.8%; 95% CI = 3.4-6.5). Further, two additional couples had increased risk for very rare conditions when both members of a parental pair were treated as a unit and the search was extended to the entire exome. About 2.3% of participants showed at least one pathogenic variant for genes included in the updated American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics v2.0 list of secondary findings. Gamete donors and IVF couples showed similar carrier burden for both carrier screening and secondary findings, indicating no causal relationship to fertility. These translational research data will facilitate development of more effective PCS strategies that maximize clinical sensitivity with minimal counterproductive effects.

25363768
The contribution of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder
Whole exome sequencing has proven to be a powerful tool for understanding the genetic architecture of human disease. Here we apply it to more than 2,500 simplex families, each having a child with an autistic spectrum disorder. By comparing affected to unaffected siblings, we show that 13% of de novo missense mutations and 43% of de novo likely gene-disrupting (LGD) mutations contribute to 12% and 9% of diagnoses, respectively. Including copy number variants, coding de novo mutations contribute to about 30% of all simplex and 45% of female diagnoses. Almost all LGD mutations occur opposite wild-type alleles. LGD targets in affected females significantly overlap the targets in males of lower intelligence quotient (IQ), but neither overlaps significantly with targets in males of higher IQ. We estimate that LGD mutation in about 400 genes can contribute to the joint class of affected females and males of lower IQ, with an overlapping and similar number of genes vulnerable to contributory missense mutation. LGD targets in the joint class overlap with published targets for intellectual disability and schizophrenia, and are enriched for chromatin modifiers, FMRP-associated genes and embryonically expressed genes. Most of the significance for the latter comes from affected females.

28191890
Refining the role of de novo protein-truncating variants in neurodevelopmental disorders by using population reference samples
Recent research has uncovered an important role for de novo variation in neurodevelopmental disorders. Using aggregated data from 9,246 families with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, or developmental delay, we found that ∼1/3 of de novo variants are independently present as standing variation in the Exome Aggregation Consortium's cohort of 60,706 adults, and these de novo variants do not contribute to neurodevelopmental risk. We further used a loss-of-function (LoF)-intolerance metric, pLI, to identify a subset of LoF-intolerant genes containing the observed signal of associated de novo protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in neurodevelopmental disorders. LoF-intolerant genes also carry a modest excess of inherited PTVs, although the strongest de novo-affected genes contribute little to this excess, thus suggesting that the excess of inherited risk resides in lower-penetrant genes. These findings illustrate the importance of population-based reference cohorts for the interpretation of candidate pathogenic variants, even for analyses of complex diseases and de novo variation.

28714951
Rates, distribution and implications of postzygotic mosaic mutations in autism spectrum disorder
We systematically analyzed postzygotic mutations (PZMs) in whole-exome sequences from the largest collection of trios (5,947) with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) available, including 282 unpublished trios, and performed resequencing using multiple independent technologies. We identified 7.5% of de novo mutations as PZMs, 83.3% of which were not described in previous studies. Damaging, nonsynonymous PZMs within critical exons of prenatally expressed genes were more common in ASD probands than controls (P < 1 × 10-6), and genes carrying these PZMs were enriched for expression in the amygdala (P = 5.4 × 10-3). Two genes (KLF16 and MSANTD2) were significantly enriched for PZMs genome-wide, and other PZMs involved genes (SCN2A, HNRNPU and SMARCA4) whose mutation is known to cause ASD or other neurodevelopmental disorders. PZMs constitute a significant proportion of de novo mutations and contribute importantly to ASD risk.

7937865
A variant epidermal growth factor receptor exhibits altered type alpha transforming growth factor binding and transmembrane signaling
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and type alpha transforming growth factor (TGF-alpha) bind to a specific region in subdomain III of the extracellular portion of the EGF receptor (EGFR). Binding leads to receptor dimerization, auto-and transphosphorylation on intracellular tyrosine residues, and activation of signal transduction pathways. We compared the binding and biological actions of EGF and TGF-alpha in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing either wild-type human EGFR (HER497R) or a variant EGFR that has an arginine-to-lysine substitution in the extracellular domain at codon 497 (HER497K) within subdomain IV of EGFR. Both receptors exhibited two orders of binding sites with radioiodinated EGF (125I-EGF). Similar results were obtained with 125I-TGF-alpha in cells expressing HER497R. In contrast, only one order of low-affinity binding sites was seen with 125I-TGF-alpha in the case of HER497K. Although EGF and TGF-alpha enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of both receptors, CHO cells expressing HER497K exhibited an attenuated growth response to EGF and TGF-alpha and a reduced induction of the protooncogenes FOS, JUN, and MYC. Moreover, high concentrations of TGF-alpha (5 nM) inhibited growth in these cells but not in cells expressing HER497R. These findings indicate that a region in subdomain IV of EGFR regulates signal transduction across the cell membrane and selectively modulates that binding characteristics of TGF-alpha.

17575224
Epidermal growth factor receptor R497K polymorphism is a favorable prognostic factor for patients with colorectal carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      It has been shown that the R497K polymorphism of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has attenuated functions in ligand binding, tyrosine kinase activation, and growth stimulation. Because the activation of EGFR results in an unfavorable prognosis of patients with colorectal carcinoma, a pilot study was conducted to assess the influence of this polymorphism on colorectal carcinoma patients.

18664296
R497K polymorphism in epidermal growth factor receptor gene is associated with the risk of acute coronary syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Previous studies suggested that genetic polymorphisms in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene had been implicated in the susceptibility to some tumors and inflammatory diseases. EGFR has been recently implicated in vascular pathophysiological processes associated with excessive remodeling and atherosclerosis. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a clinical manifestation of preceding atherosclerosis. Our purpose was to investigate the association of the EGFR polymorphism with the risk of ACS. In this context, we analyzed the HER-1 R497K and EGFR intron 1 (CA)n repeat polymorphisms in 191 patients with ACS and 210 age- and sex-matched controls in a Chinese population, using a polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) strategy and direct sequencing.

28135048
Identification of recurrent BRCA1 mutation and its clinical relevance in Chinese Triple-negative breast cancer cohort
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all newly diagnosed breast cancers, and is enriched for germline mutation of BRCA. In Asian patients diagnosed with breast cancer, 268 deleterious mutations of BRCA1 and 242 of BRCA2 have been identified so far, including a reported BRCA1 frameshift mutation (rs80350973), apparently found only in Asian people, with a low prevalence of 0.3-1.7% in different breast cancer cohorts. Here, we reported the high prevalence (7.2%) of rs80350973 among 125 Chinese patients with TNBC, which implies its mutational predilection for certain breast cancer subtypes. Although its low prevalence had not indicated any particular clinical significance in previous studies, our results associated rs80350973 mutation with cell checkpoint malfunction, and was found to be more common in TNBC patients with high Ki-67 indices (P = 0.004). As Ki-67 overexpression is a predictor of poor prognosis in TNBC, inclusion of this mutation into genetic assessments may improve the clinical management of Chinese patients with TNBC.

30306255
Multigene panel testing beyond BRCA1/2 in breast/ovarian cancer Spanish families and clinical actionability of findings
Purpose:
        
      
      Few and small studies have been reported about multigene testing usage by massively parallel sequencing in European cancer families. There is an open debate about what genes should be tested, and the actionability of some included genes is under research.

26987750
Profiling of potential driver mutations in sarcomas by targeted next generation sequencing
Comprehensive genetic profiling by massively parallel sequencing, commonly known as next generation sequencing (NGS), is becoming the foundation of personalized oncology. For sarcomas very few targeted treatments are currently in routine use. In clinical practice the preoperative diagnostic workup of soft tissue tumours largely relies on core needle biopsies. Although mostly sufficient for histopathological diagnosis, only very limited amounts of formalin fixated paraffin embedded tissue are often available for predictive mutation analysis. Targeted NGS may thus open up new possibilities for comprehensive characterization of scarce biopsies. We therefore set out to search for driver mutations by NGS in a cohort of 55 clinically and morphologically well characterized sarcomas using low input of DNA from formalin fixated paraffin embedded tissues. The aim was to investigate if there are any recurrent or targetable aberrations in cancer driver genes in addition to known chromosome translocations in different types of sarcomas. We employed a panel covering 207 mutation hotspots in 50 cancer-associated genes to analyse DNA from nine gastrointestinal stromal tumours, 14 synovial sarcomas, seven myxoid liposarcomas, 22 Ewing sarcomas and three Ewing-like small round cell tumours at a large sequencing depth to detect also mutations that are subclonal or occur at low allele frequencies. We found nine mutations in eight different potential driver genes, some of which are potentially actionable by currently existing targeted therapies. Even though no recurrent mutations in driver genes were found in the different sarcoma groups, we show that targeted NGS-based sequencing is clearly feasible in a diagnostic setting with very limited amounts of paraffin embedded tissue and may provide novel insights into mesenchymal cell signalling and potentially druggable targets. Interestingly, we also identify five non-synonymous sequence variants in 4 established cancer driver genes in DNA from normal tissue from sarcoma patients that may possibly predispose or contribute to neoplastic development.

26689913
Patterns and functional implications of rare germline variants across 12 cancer types
Large-scale cancer sequencing data enable discovery of rare germline cancer susceptibility variants. Here we systematically analyse 4,034 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas cancer cases representing 12 cancer types. We find that the frequency of rare germline truncations in 114 cancer-susceptibility-associated genes varies widely, from 4% (acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)) to 19% (ovarian cancer), with a notably high frequency of 11% in stomach cancer. Burden testing identifies 13 cancer genes with significant enrichment of rare truncations, some associated with specific cancers (for example, RAD51C, PALB2 and MSH6 in AML, stomach and endometrial cancers, respectively). Significant, tumour-specific loss of heterozygosity occurs in nine genes (ATM, BAP1, BRCA1/2, BRIP1, FANCM, PALB2 and RAD51C/D). Moreover, our homology-directed repair assay of 68 BRCA1 rare missense variants supports the utility of allelic enrichment analysis for characterizing variants of unknown significance. The scale of this analysis and the somatic-germline integration enable the detection of rare variants that may affect individual susceptibility to tumour development, a critical step toward precision medicine.

31785789
Sex-Based Analysis of De Novo Variants in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
While genes with an excess of de novo mutations (DNMs) have been identified in children with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), few studies focus on DNM patterns where the sex of affected children is examined separately. We considered ∼8,825 sequenced parent-child trios (n ∼26,475 individuals) and identify 54 genes with a DNM enrichment in males (n = 18), females (n = 17), or overlapping in both the male and female subsets (n = 19). A replication cohort of 18,778 sequenced parent-child trios (n = 56,334 individuals) confirms 25 genes (n = 3 in males, n = 7 in females, n = 15 in both male and female subsets). As expected, we observe significant enrichment on the X chromosome for females but also find autosomal genes with potential sex bias (females, CDK13, ITPR1; males, CHD8, MBD5, SYNGAP1); 6.5% of females harbor a DNM in a female-enriched gene, whereas 2.7% of males have a DNM in a male-enriched gene. Sex-biased genes are enriched in transcriptional processes and chromatin binding, primarily reside in the nucleus of cells, and have brain expression. By downsampling, we find that DNM gene discovery is greatest when studying affected females. Finally, directly comparing de novo allele counts in NDD-affected males and females identifies one replicated genome-wide significant gene (DDX3X) with locus-specific enrichment in females. Our sex-based DNM enrichment analysis identifies candidate NDD genes differentially affecting males and females and indicates that the study of females with NDDs leads to greater gene discovery consistent with the female-protective effect.

30098700
Mutation profiles and clinical characteristics of Chinese males with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Objective:
        
      
      To investigate the mutation profiles and clinical characteristics of Chinese males with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) and discover new pathogenic genes that cause IHH.

32171629
Correlations Among Genotype and Outcome in Chinese Male Patients With Congenital Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism Under HCG Treatment
Background:
        
      
      Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by absent or incomplete puberty and infertility, and heterogeneous responses are often observed during treatment.

33084842
Association of Damaging Variants in Genes With Increased Cancer Risk Among Patients With Congenital Heart Disease
Importance:
        
      
      Patients with congenital heart disease (CHD), the most common birth defect, have increased risks for cancer. Identification of the variables that contribute to cancer risk is essential for recognizing patients with CHD who warrant longitudinal surveillance and early interventions.

30610926
EGFR and ERBB2 Germline Mutations in Chinese Lung Cancer Patients and Their Roles in Genetic Susceptibility to Cancer
Introduction:
        
      
      Inherited genetic determinants of lung cancer risk remain relatively elusive. Germline mutations in EGFR and erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2) have been previously reported in lung cancers that may be associated with genetic susceptibility to lung cancer.

21575252
Germ-line mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are rare but may contribute to oncogenesis: a novel germ-line mutation in EGFR detected in a patient with lung adenocarcinoma
Background:
        
      
      A subset of lung cancer patients harbour EGFR somatic mutations in their tumours and are candidates for treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In a few cases EGFR mutations have also been found in the germ line, suggesting a role in lung carcinogenesis. Objetives of this study were: 1) To analyze the EGFR gene mutations in a population diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma from Northern Spain. 2) To determine the frequency of a new germ-line mutation found in our laboratory as well as the frequency in our population of three other EGFR germ-line mutations detected by other authors. 3) To determine whether the novel mutation detected may have a functional effect on the EGFR protein.

23358982
Activating germline R776H mutation in the epidermal growth factor receptor associated with lung cancer with squamous differentiation


17409930
Mutation and polymorphism in the EGFR-TK domain associated with lung cancer
Background:
        
      
      The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is involved in the development and progression of lung cancer. Somatic EGFR mutations are predictors of response to treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors (TKIs) for lung cancer, especially among never smokers. EGFR mutations may occur independently of other genetic alterations.

17956637
Polymorphisms in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene and the risk of primary lung cancer: a case-control study
Background:
        
      
      Polymorphisms in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) gene may influence EGFR production and/or activity, thereby modulating susceptibility to lung cancer. To test this hypothesis, we investigated the association between polymorphisms in the EGFR gene and the risk of lung cancer in a Korean population.

16258541
Inherited susceptibility to lung cancer may be associated with the T790M drug resistance mutation in EGFR
Somatic activating mutations in EGFR identify a subset of non-small cell lung cancer that respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Acquisition of drug resistance is linked to a specific secondary somatic mutation, EGFR T790M. Here we describe a family with multiple cases of non-small cell lung cancer associated with germline transmission of this mutation. Four of six tumors analyzed showed a secondary somatic activating EGFR mutation, arising in cis with the germline EGFR mutation T790M. These observations implicate altered EGFR signaling in genetic susceptibility to lung cancer.

19096324
Germ-line and somatic presentations of the EGFR T790M mutation in lung cancer


20033049
Novel mutant-selective EGFR kinase inhibitors against EGFR T790M
The clinical efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitors in EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is limited by the development of drug-resistance mutations, including the gatekeeper T790M mutation. Strategies targeting EGFR T790M with irreversible inhibitors have had limited success and are associated with toxicity due to concurrent inhibition of wild-type EGFR. All current EGFR inhibitors possess a structurally related quinazoline-based core scaffold and were identified as ATP-competitive inhibitors of wild-type EGFR. Here we identify a covalent pyrimidine EGFR inhibitor by screening an irreversible kinase inhibitor library specifically against EGFR T790M. These agents are 30- to 100-fold more potent against EGFR T790M, and up to 100-fold less potent against wild-type EGFR, than quinazoline-based EGFR inhibitors in vitro. They are also effective in murine models of lung cancer driven by EGFR T790M. Co-crystallization studies reveal a structural basis for the increased potency and mutant selectivity of these agents. These mutant-selective irreversible EGFR kinase inhibitors may be clinically more effective and better tolerated than quinazoline-based inhibitors. Our findings demonstrate that functional pharmacological screens against clinically important mutant kinases represent a powerful strategy to identify new classes of mutant-selective kinase inhibitors.

18528899
Identification of the rare EGFR mutation p.G796S as somatic and germline mutation in white patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
Background:
        
      
      Somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are involved in tumorigenesis and response to targeted therapies in distinct cancer types. Squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC) show an incidence of EGFR mutations varying from 7% in Asians to 0% to 4% in white patients. Mutational screening predominantly focuses on the analysis of hotspot regions of EGFR (exons 19 and 21).

20823418
Favorable response to gefitinib treatment of lung adenocarcinoma with coexisting germline and somatic epidermal growth factor receptor mutations


26901136
Identification of Novel Candidate Genes for Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer Susceptibility
Approximately 25-30% of colorectal cancer (CRC) cases are expected to result from a genetic predisposition, but in only 5-10% of these cases highly penetrant germline mutations are found. The remaining CRC heritability is still unexplained, and may be caused by a hitherto-undefined set of rare variants with a moderately penetrant risk. Here we aimed to identify novel risk factors for early-onset CRC using whole-exome sequencing, which was performed on a cohort of CRC individuals (n = 55) with a disease onset before 45 years of age. We searched for genes that were recurrently affected by rare variants (minor allele frequency ≤ 0.001) with potentially damaging effects and, subsequently, re-sequenced the candidate genes in a replication cohort of 174 early-onset or familial CRC individuals. Two functionally relevant genes with low frequency variants with potentially damaging effects, PTPN12 and LRP6, were found in at least three individuals. The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP-PEST, encoded by PTPN12, is a regulator of cell motility and LRP6 is a component of the WNT-FZD-LRP5-LRP6 complex that triggers WNT signaling. All variants in LRP6 were identified in individuals with an extremely early-onset of the disease (≤30 years of age), and two of the three variants showed increased WNT signaling activity in vitro. In conclusion, we present PTPN12 and LRP6 as novel candidates contributing to the heterogeneous susceptibility to CRC.

18355544
Novel germline mutation: EGFR V843I in patient with multiple lung adenocarcinomas and family members with lung cancer
A novel germline transmission of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation V843I in a family with multiple members with lung cancer is reported. The proband was a 70-year-old woman with multiple adenocarcinomas who exhibited secondary EGFR mutations, either L858R or L861Q, in the specimens of resected tumors, in addition to a germline EGFR V843I mutation. These observations suggest that the germline EGFR V843I mutation might have altered EGFR signaling in the multicentric development of adenocarcinoma, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, and atypical adenomatous hyperplasia and also might have had a role in the development of lung cancer in multiple members of her family.

21172876
Familial lung adenocarcinoma caused by the EGFR V843I germ-line mutation


23380224
A dramatic lung cancer course in a patient with a rare EGFR germline mutation exon 21 V843I: Is EGFR TKI resistance predictable?
We report on the medical history of a Caucasian smoker woman diagnosed with a stage IV NSCLC adenocarcinoma, characterized by a rare epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) point mutation in exon 21 codon 843 (p.V843I/c.2527G>A/COSMIC ID 85894). This genetic alteration revealed to be germline, after its presence was demonstrated in chondroblasts from the bone biopsy. While it is the first description of germline V843I mutation without concomitant additional known EGFR activating mutation, we modeled the EGFR ATP catalytic domain in complex with ATP, gefitinib and erlotinib using computer-aided approaches to estimate possible changes in affinity upon the V843I mutation.

16857818
Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation testing in the care of lung cancer patients
As the literature about epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations grows and screening for mutations becomes increasingly integrated into clinical care, it is important to examine how best to do somatic mutational analyses and how best to use the test results in clinical decision making. We began offering mutation screening by comprehensive direct sequence analysis of exons 18 to 24 of the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR in August 2004 as part of clinical cancer care and protocol therapy at our institutions. All identified potential mutations are confirmed with three to five independent PCRs of the original genomic DNA sample and, if not previously noted in the literature, are compared with the patient's germ-line DNA to ensure the finding is somatic. We formally analyzed the first 100 patients to undergo EGFR sequence analysis and found that testing was feasible and significantly affected the treatment of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients harboring EGFR mutations were significantly more likely to receive recommendations for therapy with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (i.e., gefitinib or erlotinib) than patients without mutations. However, negative EGFR test results did not prevent physicians from administering these agents to selected patients. Ideally, a standardized technique for mutation testing could be developed, with demonstrated reproducibility and validity. Clinical trials incorporating molecular diagnostics are ongoing to assess the efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as first-line therapy for metastatic NSCLC and as adjuvant therapy for early-stage resected NSCLC. It is likely that mutation testing and other molecular analyses will be most useful in these two clinical situations.

25176975
Germ-line exon 21 EGFR mutations, V843I and P848L, in nonsmall cell lung cancer patients


20049516
Investigating the function of three non-synonymous SNPs in EGFR gene: structural modelling and association with breast cancer
Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) represent common genomic variations that alter protein sequence and function. Some nsSNPs affecting conserved amino acids have been reported to be associated with cancer susceptibility. Interestingly, Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is commonly overexpressed and mutated in many cancers. In this study, we investigated the structural effect of three deleterious nsSNPs: rs17337451 (R962G), rs1140476 (R977C) and rs17290699 (H988P) within EGFR using computational tools. The modelled mutant dimers showed less stability than wild type EGFR dimer. Furthermore, we showed the important role of R962 and H988 residues in the EGFR dimer formation. We also report preliminary experimental data for SNP R977C suggesting that the variant C977 might confer greater risk for breast cancer. These results contribute to an improved understanding of the EGFR dimer stability and provide new elements for understanding the relationship between EGFR and cancer.

27625398
Identification of non-coding genetic variants in samples from hypoxemic respiratory disease patients that affect the transcriptional response to hypoxia
A wide range of diseases course with an unbalance between the consumption of oxygen by tissues and its supply. This situation triggers a transcriptional response, mediated by the hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs), that aims to restore oxygen homeostasis. Little is known about the inter-individual variation in this response and its role in the progression of disease. Herein, we sought to identify common genetic variants mapping to hypoxia response elements (HREs) and characterize their effect on transcription. To this end, we constructed a list of genome-wide HIF-binding regions from publicly available experimental datasets and studied the genetic variability in these regions by targeted re-sequencing of genomic samples from 96 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 144 obstructive sleep apnea patients. This study identified 14 frequent variants disrupting potential HREs. The analysis of the genomic regions containing these variants by means of reporter assays revealed that variants rs1009329, rs6593210 and rs150921338 impaired the transcriptional response to hypoxia. Finally, using genome editing we confirmed the functional role of rs6593210 in the transcriptional regulation of EGFR. In summary, we found that inter-individual variability in non-coding regions affect the response to hypoxia and could potentially impact on the progression of pulmonary diseases.

16885506
Polymorphism in Sp1 recognition site of the EGF receptor gene promoter and risk of glioblastoma
We investigated two polymorphisms of the epidermal growth factor receptor promoter as potential risk factors and prognostic markers for glioblastoma. The -216T allele (which results in a 30% higher activity) was more frequent in the patients compared with the control population (224/376 = 59.6% vs 165/352 = 46.8%; p = 0.0006) corresponding to an odd ratio of 1.67 (1.24; 2.25). A modest difference in median survival was also associated with the TT genotype.

15665278
A functional common polymorphism in a Sp1 recognition site of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene promoter
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays a prominent role in cell growth and development. Its regulation in humans is complex and incompletely understood. In this study, 12 new polymorphisms were discovered in the 5'-regulatory region of EGFR gene and 2 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (-216G/T and -191C/A) were found in the essential promoter area, one of which is located in a Sp1 recognition site (-216). Transient transfection in human cancer and primary cell lines showed significantly different promoter activity between the two most common haplotypes (-216G-191C and -216T-191C). The replacement of G by T at position -216 increases the promoter activity by 30%. A transient transfection assay in the Sp1-deficient cell line (Schneider cell line 2) showed a strong dependence of EGFR promoter activity on Sp1 and confirmed the effect of the aforementioned polymorphisms. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay also showed a significantly higher binding efficiency of nuclear protein or pure Sp1 protein to the T allele compared with the G allele. We then investigated the allelic imbalance of EGFR transcription in fibroblast cell lines with heterozygous genotype at -216G/T but C/C homozygous genotype at -191C/A. The expression of mRNA carrying T-C haplotype was significantly stronger compared with that of G-C haplotype (P < 0.02). Thus, we successfully showed that a common polymorphism in the EGFR promoter was associated with altered promoter activity and gene expression both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings have implications for cancer etiology and therapy and may also be relevant to the inherited susceptibility of other common diseases.

20621735
Epidermal growth factor receptor polymorphisms and risk for toxicity in paediatric patients treated with gefitinib
Purpose:
        
      
      To investigate associations between germline genetic variations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and toxicity in paediatric patients treated with gefitinib.

23028094
EGFR 3'UTR 774T>C polymorphism contributes to bladder cancer risk
Much evidence show that over-expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in regulating carcinogenesis. Genetic variations in 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of gene have been reported to affect gene expression by interfering with microRNAs (miRNAs), which are thought to function as either tumour suppressors or oncogenes by binding to their target mRNA. In this study, we investigated the association between the EGFR 3'UTR 774T>C polymorphism and bladder cancer risk. We used the TaqMan technology to genotype this genetic variant in a hospital-based case-control study of 908 bladder cancer patients and 1239 controls in a Chinese population. We found that the 774CC genotype was associated with a statistically significantly increased risk of bladder cancer [adjusted odds ratio = 1.29, 95% confidence interval = 1.05-1.58], compared with the 774TT/TC genotype, and this increased risk was more pronounced among subgroups of age > 65 years, non-smokers and patients' tumour invasive stage. Furthermore, luciferase assays in T24 cell showed that EGFR 3'UTR 774 T to C substitution could increase the expression of EGFR, which was consistent with the association study finding. Additionally, we also provide evidence that 774T>C polymorphism increasing EGFR expression was not regulated by hsa-miR-214 binding. These findings suggested that EGFR 3'UTR 774T>C polymorphism may contribute to susceptibility to bladder cancer.

25925667
A single nucleotide polymorphism in 3' untranslated region of epithelial growth factor receptor confers risk for pulmonary hypertension in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Objective:
        
      
      Polymorphisms located at microRNA (miRNA) binding sites may interfere with the miRNA/mRNA interaction. The objective of this study was to identify the association between a single nucleotide polymorphism (774 T>C) in 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of Epithelial Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and development of pulmonary hypertension (PH) in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as well as to explore the molecular mechanism.

30470824
The risk variant rs884225 within EGFR impairs miR-103a-3p's anti-tumourigenic function in non-small cell lung cancer
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status is the major determinant of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy selection. Studies have hinted that EGFR antibodies or tyrosine kinase inhibitors were beneficial in patients with EGFR mutation-negative but EGFR-overexpressing of NSCLC. However, the mechanisms underlying EGFR amplification and overexpression in NSCLC remain largely unknown. Here, we report that rs884225, a single nucleotide polymorphism in the EGFR 3'-terminal untranslated region, was significantly associated with EGFR expression level and contributed to NSCLC susceptibility. Mechanistically, the rs884225 C allele enhanced EGFR expression by altering the miR-103a-3p binding site, thus impairing miR-103a-3p's anti-tumourigenic function. As a tumour suppressor gene, miR-103a-3p expression correlated with overall and recurrence-free survival in NSCLC patients. Furthermore, miR-103a-3p inhibited growth and metastasis via effects on the KRAS pathway and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in EGFR wild-type NSCLC cell lines, respectively, which substantially reduced EGFR expression and activity. Thus, rs884225 may be a biomarker for NSCLC susceptibility, and miR-103a-3p may be a potential therapeutic target in NSCLC.

28726809
Genomic diagnostics within a medically underserved population: efficacy and implications
PurposeWe integrated whole-exome sequencing (WES) and chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) into a clinical workflow to serve an endogamous, uninsured, agrarian community.MethodsSeventy-nine probands (newborn to 49.8 years) who presented between 1998 and 2015 remained undiagnosed after biochemical and molecular investigations. We generated WES data for probands and family members and vetted variants through rephenotyping, segregation analyses, and population studies.ResultsThe most common presentation was neurological disease (64%). Seven (9%) probands were diagnosed by CMA. Family WES data were informative for 37 (51%) of the 72 remaining individuals, yielding a specific genetic diagnosis (n = 32) or revealing a novel molecular etiology (n = 5). For five (7%) additional subjects, negative WES decreased the likelihood of genetic disease. Compared to trio analysis, "family" WES (average seven exomes per proband) reduced filtered candidate variants from 22 ± 6 to 5 ± 3 per proband. Nineteen (51%) alleles were de novo and 17 (46%) inherited; the latter added to a population-based diagnostic panel. We found actionable secondary variants in 21 (4.2%) of 502 subjects, all of whom opted to be informed.ConclusionCMA and family-based WES streamline and economize diagnosis of rare genetic disorders, accelerate novel gene discovery, and create new opportunities for community-based screening and prevention in underserved populations.

31028937
Development of a Novel Next-Generation Sequencing Assay for Carrier Screening in Old Order Amish and Mennonite Populations of Pennsylvania
Genetically isolated populations, such as the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonite communities, have an increased incidence of specific autosomal recessive disorders caused by the founder effect. In these populations, robust expanded carrier screening and diagnostic testing have the potential to reduce overall medical costs and improve patient outcomes. A novel next-generation sequencing assay was developed using anchored multiplex PCR technology (ArcherDX) for 162 different genetic syndromes caused by 202 pathogenic variants consisting of 150 single-nucleotide changes, 43 small insertion/deletions, and 9 large deletions (>20 nucleotides). To assess the accuracy of the screening panel results, 48 samples were selected on the basis of prior whole exome sequencing results. An additional 15 samples were chosen specifically to validate SMN1 and SMN2 copy number analyses. Collectively, the screening panel detected 273 pathogenic single-nucleotide or small insertion/deletion variants, 35 copy number variations, and 1 chromosomal abnormality (Klinefelter syndrome). Concordance with prior whole exome sequencing was 100%. By using a novel next-generation sequencing workflow, a successful targeted gene variant panel was developed for the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonite populations of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Population-wide carrier screening may help decrease the morbidity and mortality of these conditions in the high-risk populations.

25017413
EGFR CA repeat polymorphism predict clinical outcome in EGFR mutation positive NSCLC patients treated with erlotinib
Objectives:
        
      
      Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are predictors of efficacy for treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A CA repeat polymorphism in intron 1 of the EGFR gene influences the transcription of the EGFR gene. This study evaluates the association between the CA repeat polymorphism and outcome in NSCLC patients treated with erlotinib.

10224073
Modulation of epidermal growth factor receptor gene transcription by a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat in intron 1
The influence of a highly polymorphic CA dinucleotide repeat in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene on transcription was examined with a quantitative nuclear run-off method. We could demonstrate that transcription of the EGFR gene is inhibited by approximately 80% in alleles with 21 CA repeats. In experiments with polymerase chain reaction products that spanned a region of more than 4,000 base pairs and contained the promoter, two enhancers, and the polymorphic region in the first intron of the gene, we found that transcription activity declines with increasing numbers of CA dinucleotides. In vivo pre-mRNA expression data from cultured cell lines support these findings, although other regulation mechanisms can outweigh this effect. In addition, we showed that under our experimental conditions RNA elongation terminates at a site closely downstream of the simple sequence repeat and that there are two separate major transcription start sites. Our results provide new insights in individually different EGFR gene expression and the role of the CA repeat in transcription of this proto-oncogene.

21292812
Functional EGFR germline polymorphisms may confer risk for EGFR somatic mutations in non-small cell lung cancer, with a predominant effect on exon 19 microdeletions
Somatic mutations in the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain play a critical role in the development and treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Strong genetic influence on susceptibility to these mutations has been suggested. To identify the genetic factors conferring risk for the EGFR tyrosine kinase mutations in NSCLC, a case-control study was conducted in 141 Taiwanese NSCLC patients by focusing on three functional polymorphisms in the EGFR gene [-216G/T, intron 1 (CA)n, and R497K]. Allelic imbalance of the EGFR -216G/T polymorphism was also tested in the heterozygous patients and in the NCI-60 cancer cell lines to further verify its function. We found that the frequencies of the alleles -216T and CA-19 are significantly higher in the patients with any mutation (P = 0.032 and 0.01, respectively), in particular in those with exon 19 microdeletions (P = 0.006 and 0.033, respectively), but not in the patients with L858R mutation. The -216T allele is favored to be amplified in both tumor DNA of lung cancer patients and cancer cell lines. We conclude that the local haplotype structures across the EGFR gene may favor the development of cellular malignancies and thus significantly confer risk to the occurrence of EGFR mutations in NSCLC, particularly the exon 19 microdeletions.

17219440
Association of the EGFR intron 1 CA repeat length with lung cancer risk
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in the development and progression of lung cancer. A previous report noted that an increased number of polymorphic CA repeats in the first intron of the EGFR gene results in decreased transcriptional activity. To estimate the association of the length of polymorphic CA repeats in intron 1 of the EGFR gene with lung cancer, a case-control study of 176 lung cancer patients and 161 controls was conducted in Caucasians. This case-control study is based on two existing prospective cohorts: the Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) and the Lung Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) at the University of Pittsburgh. The frequencies of the SL (one allele>16 repeats), and SS (both allele<or=16 repeats) genotypes were statistically higher among the cases than in the controls (OR: 1.94 and 3.04, 95% CI: 1.16-3.23 and 1.53-6.04, P-value: 0.01 and 0.001, respectively). When the length of EGFR-CA repeat was analyzed by the sum of the number of repeats in two alleles, the frequency of the shorter repeats (sum<or=36) was 79.6% versus 63.4%, respectively, and the frequency of the longer repeats (sum>36) was 20.5% versus 36.7%, for lung cancer cases versus controls. The lower sum of EGFR-CA repeats associated with the risk of lung cancer; the estimated odds ratio was 2.25 with 95% confidence interval: 1.38-3.66 (P=0.001). Associations involving EGFR-CA repeat genotype and EGFR-CA repeat sum remained significant when adjusted for age, gender, and tobacco exposure. Our study, which is preliminary, demonstrates for the first time that shorter EGFR-CA repeats associate with lung cancer risk. The number of EGFR-CA repeats identifies a possible susceptible population to lung cancer.

28944238
Targeted sequencing of 36 known or putative colorectal cancer susceptibility genes
Background:
        
      
      Mutations in several genes predispose to colorectal cancer. Genetic testing for hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes was previously limited to single gene tests; thus, only a very limited number of genes were tested, and rarely those infrequently mutated in colorectal cancer. Next-generation sequencing technologies have made it possible to sequencing panels of genes known and suspected to influence colorectal cancer susceptibility.

28861920
Higher-than-expected population prevalence of potentially pathogenic germline TP53 variants in individuals unselected for cancer history
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal-dominant cancer predisposition disorder associated with pathogenic germline variants in TP53, with a high penetrance over an individual's lifetime. The actual population prevalence of pathogenic germline TP53 mutations is still unclear, most likely due to biased selection of cancer affected families. The aim of this study was to estimate the population prevalence of potentially pathogenic TP53 exonic variants in three sequencing databases, totaling 63,983 unrelated individuals. Potential pathogenicity was defined using an original algorithm combining bioinformatic prediction tools, suggested clinical significance, and functional data. We identified 34 different potentially pathogenic TP53 variants in 131 out of 63,983 individuals (0.2%). Twenty-eight (82%) of these variants fell within the DNA-binding domain of TP53, with an enrichment for specific variants that were not previously identified as LFS mutation hotspots, such as the p.R290H and p.N235S variants. Our findings reveal that the population prevalence of potentially pathogenic TP53 variants may be up to 10 times higher than previously estimated from family-based studies. These results point to the need for further studies aimed at evaluating cancer penetrance modifiers as well as the risk associated between cancer and rare TP53 variants.

30287823
Germline pathogenic variants of 11 breast cancer genes in 7,051 Japanese patients and 11,241 controls
Pathogenic variants in highly penetrant genes are useful for the diagnosis, therapy, and surveillance for hereditary breast cancer. Large-scale studies are needed to inform future testing and variant classification processes in Japanese. We performed a case-control association study for variants in coding regions of 11 hereditary breast cancer genes in 7051 unselected breast cancer patients and 11,241 female controls of Japanese ancestry. Here, we identify 244 germline pathogenic variants. Pathogenic variants are found in 5.7% of patients, ranging from 15% in women diagnosed <40 years to 3.2% in patients ≥80 years, with BRCA1/2, explaining two-thirds of pathogenic variants identified at all ages. BRCA1/2, PALB2, and TP53 are significant causative genes. Patients with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 or PTEN have significantly younger age at diagnosis. In conclusion, BRCA1/2, PALB2, and TP53 are the major hereditary breast cancer genes, irrespective of age at diagnosis, in Japanese women.

33245408
TP53 germline mutations in the context of families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer: a clinical challenge
Purpose:
        
      
      TP53germline (g) mutations, associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), have rarely been reported in the context of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). The prevalence and cancer risks in this target group are unknown and counseling remains challenging. Notably an extensive high-risk surveillance program is implemented, which evokes substantial psychological discomfort. Emphasizing the lack of consensus about clinical implications, we aim to further characterize TP53g mutations in HBOC families.

30840781
A quantitative model to predict pathogenicity of missense variants in the TP53 gene
Germline pathogenic variants in the TP53 gene cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a condition that predisposes individuals to a wide range of cancer types. Identification of individuals carrying a TP53 pathogenic variant is linked to clinical management decisions, such as the avoidance of radiotherapy and use of high-intensity screening programs. The aim of this study was to develop an evidence-based quantitative model that integrates independent in silico data (Align-GVGD and BayesDel) and somatic to germline ratio (SGR), to assign pathogenicity to every possible missense variant in the TP53 gene. To do this, a likelihood ratio for pathogenicity (LR) was derived from each component calibrated using reference sets of assumed pathogenic and benign missense variants. A posterior probability of pathogenicity was generated by combining LRs, and algorithm outputs were validated using different approaches. A total of 730 TP53 missense variants could be assigned to a clinically interpretable class. The outputs of the model correlated well with existing clinical information, functional data, and ClinVar classifications. In conclusion, these quantitative outputs provide the basis for individualized assessment of cancer risk useful for clinical interpretation. In addition, we propose the value of the novel SGR approach for use within the ACMG/AMP guidelines for variant classification.

33300245
Specifications of the ACMG/AMP variant interpretation guidelines for germline TP53 variants
Germline pathogenic variants in TP53 are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a cancer predisposition disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern associated with a high risk of malignancy, including early-onset breast cancers, sarcomas, adrenocortical carcinomas, and brain tumors. Intense cancer surveillance for individuals with TP53 germline pathogenic variants is associated with reduced cancer-related mortality. Accurate and consistent classification of germline variants across clinical and research laboratories is important to ensure appropriate cancer surveillance recommendations. Here, we describe the work performed by the Clinical Genome Resource TP53 Variant Curation Expert Panel (ClinGen TP53 VCEP) focused on specifying the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) guidelines for germline variant classification to the TP53 gene. Specifications were developed for 20 ACMG/AMP criteria, while nine were deemed not applicable. The original strength level for the 10 criteria was also adjusted due to current evidence. Use of TP53-specific guidelines and sharing of clinical data among experts and clinical laboratories led to a decrease in variants of uncertain significance from 28% to 12% compared with the original guidelines. The ClinGen TP53 VCEP recommends the use of these TP53-specific ACMG/AMP guidelines as the standard strategy for TP53 germline variant classification.

22571758
De novo childhood myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disease with unique molecular characteristics
Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative uclassifiable (MDS/MPN-U) is a rare myeloid neoplasm characterized by myelodysplasia and myeloproliferation at the time of initial presentation, which is usually a diagnosis of exclusion. The molecular pathogenesis of MDS/MPN-U patients remains to be elucidated. Among five patients diagnosed with MDS/MPN-U, three patients harboured RUNX1 (AML1) mutations; one carried somatic mosaicism of RUNX1 mutation with JAK2(V617F) mutation and one had dual RUNX1 and FLT3-internal tandem duplication mutations with progression to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Germline mutation of TP53 was detected as a sole genetic lesion in one patient. JAK2(V617F) and somatic mosaicism of KRAS and TET2 mutations co-existed in one patient. Otherwise, no alterations were detected in PTPN11, NRAS, CBL and ASXL1 genes. ETV6-PDGFRB fusion transcript was not detected in all patients. Four patients recieved haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT); three patients relapsed and one achieved complete remission after three donor lymphocyte infusions. Our findings suggest that the mutational spectrum observed in childhood MDS/MPN-U is quite different from that seen in juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia and, to some extent, resemble chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia. Moreover, two patients had constitutional alterations of genes frequently found in AML. Further investigations are required to define the roles of these genetic alterations in the pathogenesis of childhood MDS/MPN-U.

24896186
Novel somatic and germline mutations in intracranial germ cell tumours
Intracranial germ cell tumours (IGCTs) are a group of rare heterogeneous brain tumours that are clinically and histologically similar to the more common gonadal GCTs. IGCTs show great variation in their geographical and gender distribution, histological composition and treatment outcomes. The incidence of IGCTs is historically five- to eightfold greater in Japan and other East Asian countries than in Western countries, with peak incidence near the time of puberty. About half of the tumours are located in the pineal region. The male-to-female incidence ratio is approximately 3-4:1 overall, but is even higher for tumours located in the pineal region. Owing to the scarcity of tumour specimens available for research, little is currently known about this rare disease. Here we report the analysis of 62 cases by next-generation sequencing, single nucleotide polymorphism array and expression array. We find the KIT/RAS signalling pathway frequently mutated in more than 50% of IGCTs, including novel recurrent somatic mutations in KIT, its downstream mediators KRAS and NRAS, and its negative regulator CBL. Novel somatic alterations in the AKT/mTOR pathway included copy number gains of the AKT1 locus at 14q32.33 in 19% of patients, with corresponding upregulation of AKT1 expression. We identified loss-of-function mutations in BCORL1, a transcriptional co-repressor and tumour suppressor. We report significant enrichment of novel and rare germline variants in JMJD1C, which codes for a histone demethylase and is a coactivator of the androgen receptor, among Japanese IGCT patients. This study establishes a molecular foundation for understanding the biology of IGCTs and suggests potentially promising therapeutic strategies focusing on the inhibition of KIT/RAS activation and the AKT1/mTOR pathway.

28724667
Germline Mutations in Cancer Susceptibility Genes in a Large Series of Unselected Breast Cancer Patients
Purpose: The prevalence of mutations in cancer susceptibility genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2 and other cancer susceptibility genes and their clinical relevance are largely unknown among a large series of unselected breast cancer patients in the Chinese population.Experimental Design: A total of 8,085 consecutive unselected Chinese breast cancer patients were enrolled. Germline mutations in 46 cancer susceptibility genes were detected using a 62-gene panel.Results: Pathogenic mutations were identified in 9.2% of patients among the 8,085 unselected breast cancer patients. Of these, 5.3% of patients carried a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation (1.8% in BRCA1 and 3.5% in BRCA2), 2.9% carried other breast cancer susceptibility genes (BOCG) and 1.0% carried another cancer susceptibility genes. Triple-negative breast cancers had the highest prevalence of BRCA1/2 mutations (11.2%) and other BOCG mutations (3.8%) among the four molecular subgroups, whereas ER-/PR-HER2+ breast cancers had the lowest mutations in BRCA1/2 (1.8%) and BOCG (1.6%). In addition, BRCA1 mutation carriers had a significant worse disease-free survival [unadjusted hazard ratio (HR) 1.60; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.10-2.34; P = 0.014] and disease-specific survival (unadjusted HR 1.96; 95% CI, 1.03-3.65; P = 0.040) than did non-carriers, whereas no significant difference in survival was found between BRCA2 mutation carriers and non-carriers.Conclusions: 9.2% of breast cancer patients carry a pathogenic mutation in cancer susceptibility genes in this large unselected series. Triple-negative breast cancers have the highest prevalence of mutations in BRCA1 /2 and other breast cancer susceptibility genes among the four molecular subgroups, whereas ER-/PR-HER2+ breast cancers had the lowest mutations in these genes. Clin Cancer Res; 23(20); 6113-9. ©2017 AACR.

25318593
Frequent occurrence of gastric cancer in Asian kindreds with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Type of cancer and age of onset in individuals with inherited aberrations in the tumour suppressor gene TP53 are variable, possibly influenced by genetic modifiers and different environmental exposure. Since 2009, the modified Chompret criteria (MCC) have been used to identify individuals for TP53 mutation screening. Using the TP53 mutation database maintained by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), we investigated if the MCC, mainly developed for a Caucasian population, was also applicable in Asia. We identified several differences in Asian families compared with similar Caucasian cohorts, suggesting that identification and management of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in Asia do not completely mirror that of North America and Western Europe. Early gastric cancer (<40 years) may be considered a new addition to the MCC especially for Asian families.

17690113
Identification and characterization of a novel germ line p53 mutation in familial gastric cancer in the Japanese population
Germ line mutations of the p53 gene are known to cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and a germ line p53 mutation has recently been reported in a small subset of familial gastric cancer (FGC) in Europe and Korea. Although the incidence of gastric cancer is very high in Japan and familial clustering is not uncommon, there has been little information on the genetic factors of FGC. Therefore, to determine the role of germ line p53 mutations in FGC in the Japanese population in this study, we used sequencing analysis to examine 80 individuals from 35 Japanese FGC families without germ line CDH1 mutations for germ line p53 mutations. One missense (c.91G>A: p.Val31Ile) and two intronic germ line mutations were found, and transcriptional activity of the Ile31 mutant on p53-responsive genes was examined to determine the functional effect of the novel p.Val31Ile germ line mutation. A luciferase reporter assay showed that the transcriptional activity of p21 (CDKN1A) and MDM2 promoters but not of the BAX promoter was significantly lower in the Ile31-type p53 than in the wild-type (wt) p53. Next, doxycycline-regulated p53-inducible H1299 cell lines were established by applying a retrovirus-mediated gene transfer system to a p53-null human H1299 cell line. Under similar p53 expression conditions shown by western blot and immunofluorescence analyses, a cell proliferation assay showed that the Ile31-type p53 had significantly lower cell proliferation suppressing activity than wt p53. These results suggest that Ile31-type p53 may be partly involved in FGC because of its low transcriptional activity and low cell proliferation suppressing activity.

24728327
Germline variation in cancer-susceptibility genes in a healthy, ancestrally diverse cohort: implications for individual genome sequencing
Technological advances coupled with decreasing costs are bringing whole genome and whole exome sequencing closer to routine clinical use. One of the hurdles to clinical implementation is the high number of variants of unknown significance. For cancer-susceptibility genes, the difficulty in interpreting the clinical relevance of the genomic variants is compounded by the fact that most of what is known about these variants comes from the study of highly selected populations, such as cancer patients or individuals with a family history of cancer. The genetic variation in known cancer-susceptibility genes in the general population has not been well characterized to date. To address this gap, we profiled the nonsynonymous genomic variation in 158 genes causally implicated in carcinogenesis using high-quality whole genome sequences from an ancestrally diverse cohort of 681 healthy individuals. We found that all individuals carry multiple variants that may impact cancer susceptibility, with an average of 68 variants per individual. Of the 2,688 allelic variants identified within the cohort, most are very rare, with 75% found in only 1 or 2 individuals in our population. Allele frequencies vary between ancestral groups, and there are 21 variants for which the minor allele in one population is the major allele in another. Detailed analysis of a selected subset of 5 clinically important cancer genes, BRCA1, BRCA2, KRAS, TP53, and PTEN, highlights differences between germline variants and reported somatic mutations. The dataset can serve a resource of genetic variation in cancer-susceptibility genes in 6 ancestry groups, an important foundation for the interpretation of cancer risk from personal genome sequences.

20805372
A novel HER2-positive breast cancer phenotype arising from germline TP53 mutations
Introduction:
        
      
      The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome is caused by a germline TP53 mutation and is associated with a high risk of breast cancer at young ages. Basal (triple negative) breast cancers are now well recognised to be a typical sub-type of breast cancer developing in a large proportion of BRCA1 gene carriers. We considered whether a similar narrow sub-type of breast cancer was found in TP53 gene mutation carriers.

25525159
RNA splicing. The human splicing code reveals new insights into the genetic determinants of disease
To facilitate precision medicine and whole-genome annotation, we developed a machine-learning technique that scores how strongly genetic variants affect RNA splicing, whose alteration contributes to many diseases. Analysis of more than 650,000 intronic and exonic variants revealed widespread patterns of mutation-driven aberrant splicing. Intronic disease mutations that are more than 30 nucleotides from any splice site alter splicing nine times as often as common variants, and missense exonic disease mutations that have the least impact on protein function are five times as likely as others to alter splicing. We detected tens of thousands of disease-causing mutations, including those involved in cancers and spinal muscular atrophy. Examination of intronic and exonic variants found using whole-genome sequencing of individuals with autism revealed misspliced genes with neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Our approach provides evidence for causal variants and should enable new discoveries in precision medicine.

30720243
High prevalence of cancer-associated TP53 variants in the gnomAD database: A word of caution concerning the use of variant filtering
The 1,000 genome project, the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) or the Genome Aggregation database (gnomAD) datasets, were developed to provide large-scale reference data of genetic variations for various populations to filter out common benign variants and identify rare variants of clinical importance based on their frequency in the human population. Using a TP53 repository of 80,000 cancer variants, as well as TP53 variants from multiple cancer genome projects, we have defined a set of certified oncogenic TP53 variants. This specific set has been independently validated by functional and in silico predictive analysis. Here we show that a significant number of these variants are included in gnomAD and ExAC. Most of them correspond to TP53 hotspot variants occurring as somatic and germline events in human cancer. Similarly, disease-associated variants for five other tumor suppressor genes, including BRCA1, BRCA2, APC, PTEN, and MLH1, have also been identified. This study demonstrates that germline TP53 variants in the human population are more frequent than previously thought. Furthermore, population databases such as gnomAD or ExAC must be used with caution and need to be annotated for the presence of oncogenic variants to improve their clinical utility.

31321604
TP53 variants of uncertain significance: increasing challenges in variant interpretation and genetic counseling
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and Li-Fraumeni Like (LFL) are autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndromes caused by pathogenic germline variants in the TP53 gene. Recent studies have shown that the incorporation of next-generation sequencing by using multigene panels in clinical practice has resulted in the frequent identification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Given that there is no established medical management for VUS carriers, the identification of these variants may cause confusion and anxiety for both patients and practitioners. Herein, we aimed to verify VUS frequency and review VUS classification and interpretation in 1844 patients submitted for comprehensive germline TP53 testing independent of clinical criteria. Variant characterization was done assessing clinical information whenever available, variant frequency in population databases, pathogenicity predictions using in silico tools and previous functional studies. All variants were classified based on the guidelines proposed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (2015) and by the Sherloc framework (2017). Of the twelve VUS (0.65%) identified in TP53, two were classified as likely pathogenic and two were classified as likely benign after re-evaluation, potentially resulting in significant management modification for the proband and relatives. This report cases highlights the challenges and impact of TP53 variant interpretation especially when there is no clear LFS/LFL phenotype.

15851479
The codon 47 polymorphism in p53 is functionally significant
In addition to a common polymorphism at codon 72, the p53 tumor suppressor gene also contains a rare single nucleotide polymorphism at amino acid 47. Wild type p53 encodes proline at this residue, but in <5% of African Americans, this amino acid is serine. Notably, phosphorylation of the adjacent serine 46 by the proline-directed kinase p38 MAPK is known to greatly enhance the ability of p53 to induce apoptosis. Here we showed that the serine 47 polymorphic variant, which replaces the proline residue necessary for recognition by proline-directed kinases, is a markedly poorer substrate for phosphorylation on serine 46 by p38 MAPK. Consistent with this finding, we showed that the serine 47 variant has up to 5-fold decreased ability to induce apoptosis compared with wild type p53. Mechanistically, we found that this variant has decreased ability to transactivate two p53 target genes, p53AIP1 and PUMA, but not other p53 response genes; this is the first time that phosphorylation of serine 46 has been implicated in transactivation of PUMA by p53. Down-regulation of PUMA in cells with wild type p53 using short interfering RNAs reduced apoptosis in these cells to a level comparable to that in cells containing the serine 47 variant. The combined data indicated that, like the codon 72 polymorphism, the codon 47 polymorphism of p53 is functionally significant and may play a role in cancer risk, progression, and the efficacy of therapy.

12826609
Understanding the function-structure and function-mutation relationships of p53 tumor suppressor protein by high-resolution missense mutation analysis
Inactivation of the tumor suppressor p53 by missense mutations is the most frequent genetic alteration in human cancers. The common missense mutations in the TP53 gene disrupt the ability of p53 to bind to DNA and consequently to transactivate downstream genes. However, it is still not fully understood how a large number of the remaining mutations affect p53 structure and function. Here, we used a comprehensive site-directed mutagenesis technique and a yeast-based functional assay to construct, express, and evaluate 2,314 p53 mutants representing all possible amino acid substitutions caused by a point mutation throughout the protein (5.9 substitutions per residue), and correlated p53 function with structure- and tumor-derived mutations. This high-resolution mutation analysis allows evaluation of previous predictions and hypotheses through interrelation of function, structure and mutation.

19165225
p53 polymorphisms: cancer implications
The normal functioning of p53 is a potent barrier to cancer. Tumour-associated mutations in TP53, typically single nucleotide substitutions in the coding sequence, are a hallmark of most human cancers and cause dramatic defects in p53 function. By contrast, only a small fraction, if any, of the >200 naturally occurring sequence variations (single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) of TP53 in human populations are expected to cause measurable perturbation of p53 function. Polymorphisms in the TP53 locus that might have cancer-related phenotypical manifestations are the subject of this Review. Polymorphic variants of other genes in the p53 pathway, such as MDM2, which might have biological consequences either individually or in combination with p53 variants are also discussed.

27545002
Prevalence of low-penetrant germline TP53 D49H mutation in Japanese cancer patients
Using whole exome sequencing data obtained from 1,685 Japanese cancer patients, we examined genetic variations of germline TP53 and found 10 types of non-synonymous single nucleotide variants. In the present study, we focused on 6 patients with germline D49H mutation located in the transactivation domain 2 of p53 protein, since the mutation seemed to be prevalent in cancer patients and to be pathogenic. According to the initial survey for family history of the proband with the germline TP53 D49H mutation, one osteosarcoma patient and his pedigree fulfill the criteria for Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome and the 2009 Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation screening. Since this patient possesses double germline mutations of TP53 D49H and A159D, further studies are required to evaluate contribution of the D49H mutation in this morbidity. The remaining 5 patients had family histories of cancer, but none fulfills the criteria either for the Li-Fraumeni/Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes or the 2009 Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation screening. It is possible to postulate that the germline TP53 D49H mutation is likely to be low-penetrant in some pedigrees. The present study also indicates that the survey for the germline TP53 mutation plays an important role in clinical practice as it will prevent mistaking cancer patients with unusual heredities for sporadic cases.

28902083
Nodular Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma in a 15-Year-Old Boy With Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Having a Germline TP53 D49H Mutation
Germline mutations in TP53 are the primary cause of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Most mutations are reported within the DNA-binding domain. We report a case of a 15-year-old boy with LFS who developed early-stage nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, a rare subtype of Hodgkin lymphomas. His sister was diagnosed with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma at the age of 1.5 years. Sequence analysis revealed a germline mutation in the transactivation domain of TP53, c.145G>C (p.D49H), in the patient, his sister, and father. One family with LFS with a germline TP53 D49H mutation has previously been reported. This report supports the pathogenicity of this mutation.

18246963
Early-onset of sporadic basal-cell carcinoma: germline mutations in the TP53, PTCH, and XPD genes
Background:
        
      
      Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common non-melanoma skin cancer in the Western world. The objective of this study was to examine together germline mutations in the TP53, PTCH, and XPD genes as risk factors for developing BCC at a young age. We hypothesized that mutations in these genes significantly increase the risk of early-onset BCC (< or = 35 years).

30032850
Germline mutations in young non-smoking women with lung adenocarcinoma
Objectives:
        
      
      Although the primary cause of lung cancer is smoking, a considerable proportion of all lung cancers occur in never smokers. Gender influences the risk and characteristics of lung cancer and women are overrepresented among never smokers with the disease. Young age at onset and lack of established environmental risk factors suggest genetic predisposition. In this study, we used population-based sampling of young patients to discover candidate predisposition variants for lung adenocarcinoma in never-smoking women.

32283892
Spectrum of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations in Turkish colorectal cancer patients: a single center study
Background/aim:
        
      
      Quarter of colorectal cancer patients have a family history and 6% of these comprise hereditary cancer syndromes. For developing national health strategies for genetic screening, it is crucial to determine the spectrum of damaging alterations in causative genes and to describe frequent founder mutations.

31105275
Genotype-phenotype associations among panel-based TP53+ subjects
Purpose:
        
      
      Panel testing has led to the identification of TP53 pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variant carriers (TP53+) who exhibit a broad range of phenotypes. We sought to evaluate and compare genotype-phenotype associations among TP53+ panel-ascertained subjects.

29752822
Germline mutations in 40 cancer susceptibility genes among Chinese patients with high hereditary risk breast cancer
Multigene panel testing of breast cancer predisposition genes have been extensively conducted in Europe and America, which is relatively rare in Asia however. In this study, we assessed the frequency of germline mutations in 40 cancer predisposition genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, among a large cohort of Chinese patients with high hereditary risk of BC. From 2015 to 2016, consecutive BC patients from 26 centers of China with high hereditary risk were recruited (n = 937). Clinical information was collected and next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using blood samples of participants to identify germline mutations. In total, we acquired 223 patients with putative germline mutations, including 159 in BRCA1/2, 61 in 15 other BC susceptibility genes and 3 in both BRCA1/2 and non-BRCA1/2 gene. Major mutant non-BRCA1/2 genes were TP53 (n = 18), PALB2 (n = 11), CHEK2 (n = 6), ATM (n = 6) and BARD1 (n = 5). No factors predicted pathologic mutations in non-BRCA1/2 genes when treated as a whole. TP53 mutations were associated with HER-2 positive BC and younger age at diagnosis; and CHEK2 and PALB2 mutations were enriched in patients with luminal BC. Among high hereditary risk Chinese BC patients, 23.8% contained germline mutations, including 6.8% in non-BRCA1/2 genes. TP53 and PALB2 had a relatively high mutation rate (1.9 and 1.2%). Although no factors predicted for detrimental mutations in non-BRCA1/2 genes, some clinical features were associated with mutations of several particular genes.

21761402
Early onset HER2-positive breast cancer is associated with germline TP53 mutations
Background:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations predispose to early onset breast cancer in women and are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Published data on the pathological characteristics of breast cancer among women with TP53 mutations is limited.

30274973
High Prevalence of Hereditary Cancer Syndromes and Outcomes in Adults with Early-Onset Pancreatic Cancer
Introduction: We aimed to determine the prevalence and landscape of germline mutations among patients with young-onset pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) as well as their influence in prognosis.Methods: Patients from two cohorts were studied, the high-risk cohort (HRC), which included 584 PDAC patients who received genetic counseling at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, and a general cohort (GC) with 233 metastatic PDAC patients. We defined germline DNA sequencing on 13 known pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes. The prevalence and landscape of mutations were determined, and clinical characteristics including survival were analyzed.Results: A total of 409 patients underwent genetic testing (277 from HRC and 132 from GC). As expected, the HRC had higher prevalence of germline mutations compared with the GC: 17.3% versus 6.81%. The most common mutations in both cohorts were in BRCA1/2 and mismatch-repair (MMR) genes. Patients younger than 60 years old had significantly higher prevalence of germline mutations in both the HRC [odds ratios (OR), 1.93 ± 1.03-3.70, P = 0.039] and GC (4.78 ± 1.10-32.95, P = 0.036). Furthermore, PDAC patients with germline mutations in the GC had better overall survival than patients without mutations (HR, 0.44; 95% CI of HR, 0.25-0.76, P = 0.030).Discussion: Germline mutations are highly prevalent in patients with PDAC of early onset and can be predictive of better outcomes. Considering emerging screening strategies for relatives carrying susceptibility genes as well as impact on therapy choices, genetic counseling and testing should be encouraged in PDAC patients, particularly those of young onset. Cancer Prev Res; 11(11); 679-86. ©2018 AACR.

30709875
Hematologic malignancies and Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant condition associated with a high risk of a broad range of childhood- and adult-onset cancers. LFS is related to germline mutations of the tumor-suppressor gene TP53 The most common reported leukemia associated with LFS is hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia, but myeloid malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) are also reported, often in the setting of therapy-related disease. We reviewed the clinicopathologic characteristics including cytogenetics and molecular analysis for seven adult patients with LFS and hematologic malignancies evaluated at the Hereditary Hematologic Malignancy Clinic (HHMC) at MD Anderson Cancer Center. We present this LFS review series to increase awareness of LFS for the appropriate diagnosis of both patients and potentially affected relatives, as well as provide experience with patient outcomes in this difficult to treat population.

8625447
Analysis of a germ line polymorphism of the p53 gene in lung cancer patients; discrete results with smoking history
The p53 tumor suppressor gene is often mutated in various human cancers and a common polymorphism is known at codon 72 of exon 4, with two alleles encoding either arginine (CGC) or proline (CCC). Association of this polymorphism with any human cancer susceptibility has yet to be clarified. We have conducted a case-control study in Japan on the distribution of the three genotypes with 191 lung cancer patients, 152 control patients with non-cancerous pulmonary diseases and 115 colorectal cancer patients. The genotypes were examined by PCR using DNA samples from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Frequency distributions of the three genotypes were quite comparable with each other among groups, with allelic frequencies of approximately 60% for arginine and 40% for proline. The genotypic frequencies in lung cancer patients, however, were largely different between smokers and non-smokers (chi 2 = 13.5, df = 2, P < 0.001). Compared with the control and colorectal cancer patients a significant difference in genotypic frequency was observed only in non-smoker lung cancers (chi 2 = 10.9, df = 2, P < 0.01), with an excess of Arg/Arg homozygotes and a deficit of Arg/Pro heterozygotes. Our present data suggest that the p53 polymorphism affects the risk of lung cancer unrelated to smoking.

9607760
Role of a p53 polymorphism in the development of human papillomavirus-associated cancer
The E6 oncoprotein derived from tumour-associated human papillomaviruses (HPVs) binds to and induces the degradation of the cellular tumour-suppressor protein p53. A common polymorphism that occurs in the p53 amino-acid sequence results in the presence of either a proline or an arginine at position 72. The effect of this polymorphism on the susceptibility of p53 to E6-mediated degradation has been investigated and the arginine form of p53 was found to be significantly more susceptible than the proline form. Moreover, allelic analysis of patients with HPV-associated tumours revealed a striking overrepresentation of homozygous arginine-72 p53 compared with the normal population, which indicated that individuals homozygous for arginine 72 are about seven times more susceptible to HPV-associated tumorigenesis than heterozygotes. The arginine-encoding allele therefore represents a significant risk factor in the development of HPV-associated cancers.

9891044
Two polymorphic variants of wild-type p53 differ biochemically and biologically
The wild-type p53 protein exhibits a common polymorphism at amino acid 72, resulting in either a proline residue (p53Pro) or an arginine residue (p53Arg) at this position. Despite the difference that this change makes in the primary structure of the protein resulting in a difference in migration during sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, no differences in the biochemical or biological characteristics of these wild-type p53 variants have been reported. We have recently shown that p53Arg is significantly more susceptible than p53Pro to the degradation induced by human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 protein. Moreover, this may result in an increased susceptibility to HPV-induced tumors in homozygous p53Arg individuals. In further investigating the characteristics of these p53 variants, we now show that both forms are morphologically wild type and do not differ in their ability to bind to DNA in a sequence-specific manner. However, there are a number of differences between the p53 variants in their abilities to bind components of the transcriptional machinery, to activate transcription, to induce apoptosis, and to repress the transformation of primary cells. These observations may have implications for the development of cancers which harbor wild-type p53 sequences and possibly for the ability of such tumors to respond to therapy, depending on their p53 genotype.

8710380
A novel p53 germline alteration identified in a late onset breast cancer kindred
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, characterized by childhood sarcoma, leukemia and early onset breast cancer and has occasionally been found also in familial breast-ovarian cancer. Most mutations found are of missense type and located in the central region of the gene (exons 5 to 8). In the present study, a germline p53 alteration was identified in a late onset breast cancer family (kindred Lund 5; mean age 58 years) using single stranded conformation polymorphism and sequence analysis. The mutation (a CCG to CTG transition) at codon 82 in exon 4, resulting in a proline to leucine substitution, has not previously been reported and was not present in a control set of 60 healthy individuals. Three of five woman with breast cancer (45, 57 and 65 years) were carriers of the alteration. Loss of heterozygosity at the p53 locus was not seen in the primary tumors of these women, but appeared as a partial loss of the wildtype allele in subsequent recurrent lesions of two gene carriers. The family manifested no linkage to the p53 gene (a two-point LOD-score of -0.41), and has previously also been excluded for linkage to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 loci, as well as being carrier of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Although it seems unlikely that the p53 germline mutation is the major cause of disease predisposition in Lund 5, the data suggest that some p53 alteration may confer a subtle influence on breast cancer development and progression.

17606709
Transcriptional functionality of germ line p53 mutants influences cancer phenotype
Purpose:
        
      
      The TP53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a sequence-specific transcription factor that is able to transactivate several sets of genes, the promoters of which include appropriate response elements. Although human cancers frequently contain mutated p53, the alleles as well as the clinical expression are often heterogeneous. Germ line mutations of TP53 result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni--like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. p53 mutants can be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles depending on their ability to transactivate a set of human target sequences, as measured using a standardized yeast-based assay (see http://www.umd.be:2072/index.html). We have investigated the extent to which the functional features of p53 mutant alleles determine clinical features in patients who have inherited these alleles and have developed cancer.

20128691
Analysis of the DNA-binding activity of p53 mutants using functional protein microarrays and its relationship to transcriptional activation
Sequence-specific DNA binding is the key function through which tumor suppressor p53 exerts transactivation of the downstream target genes, often being impaired in cancer cells by mutations in the TP53 gene. Functional protein microarray technology enables a high-throughput parallel analysis of protein properties within one experiment under the same conditions. Using an array approach, we analyzed the DNA binding activity of wild type p53 protein and of 49 variants. Our results show significant differences in the binding properties between the p53 mutants. The C-terminal mutant R337C displayed the highest DNA binding activity on the array. However, the same mutant showed only a partial activation in the reporter gene assay and almost no activation of downstream target genes after transfection of expression vector into cells lacking endogenous p53. These observations demonstrate that DNA binding itself is not sufficient for activating the p53 target genes in at least some of the p53 mutants and, therefore, in vitro studies might not always reflect in vivo conditions.

31060593
Frequency of pathogenic germline variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2 and TP53 in ductal carcinoma in situ diagnosed in women under the age of 50 years
Introduction:
        
      
      Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-obligate precursor of invasive ductal breast cancer, and approximately 20% of screen-detected tumours are pure DCIS. Most risk factors for breast cancer have similar associations with DCIS and IDC; however, there is limited data on the prevalence of the known high and moderate penetrance breast cancer predisposition genes in DCIS and which women with DCIS should be referred for genetic screening. The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of germline variants in BRCA2, BRCA1, CHEK2, PALB2 and TP53 in DCIS in women aged less than 50 years of age.

31447099
Harmonizing Clinical Sequencing and Interpretation for the eMERGE III Network
The advancement of precision medicine requires new methods to coordinate and deliver genetic data from heterogeneous sources to physicians and patients. The eMERGE III Network enrolled >25,000 participants from biobank and prospective cohorts of predominantly healthy individuals for clinical genetic testing to determine clinically actionable findings. The network developed protocols linking together the 11 participant collection sites and 2 clinical genetic testing laboratories. DNA capture panels targeting 109 genes were used for testing of DNA and sample collection, data generation, interpretation, reporting, delivery, and storage were each harmonized. A compliant and secure network enabled ongoing review and reconciliation of clinical interpretations, while maintaining communication and data sharing between clinicians and investigators. A total of 202 individuals had positive diagnostic findings relevant to the indication for testing and 1,294 had additional/secondary findings of medical significance deemed to be returnable, establishing data return rates for other testing endeavors. This study accomplished integration of structured genomic results into multiple electronic health record (EHR) systems, setting the stage for clinical decision support to enable genomic medicine. Further, the established processes enable different sequencing sites to harmonize technical and interpretive aspects of sequencing tests, a critical achievement toward global standardization of genomic testing. The eMERGE protocols and tools are available for widespread dissemination.

16644204
BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 mutations in very early-onset breast cancer with associated risks to relatives
Pathological mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. This study evaluated mutation frequency of these genes in early-onset breast cancer patients, and correlated this with family history and determined relative risks to family members. Patients with breast adenocarcinoma diagnosed 30 years were ascertained between 1980 and 1997. Family history was established and mutation screening of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes was performed. Estimates of penetrance and relative risk were undertaken. DNA was obtained from 100/139 women. 17/36 familial cases had a BRCA1, BRCA2 or TP53 mutation. Of 64 non-familial cases, one BRCA2, two BRCA1 and two TP53 mutations were detected. Penetrance estimates (by age 70) for breast cancer were 84% for BRCA1 mutations and 91% for BRCA2 mutations and for ovarian cancer, 60% and 26%, respectively. Relative risks associated with mutations were consistent with previous studies. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in patients with breast cancer 30 years are predicted strongly by family history. The majority of families with ovarian cancer were due to mutations in BRCA1/2 whereas these mutations only accounted for 30-50% of the excess breast cancers.

15564800
Novel germline mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1, BRCA2 and p53 gene in breast cancer patients from India
Mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for more than 80% of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. p53 tumor suppressor gene that controls cellular growth and differentiation is also known to be mutated in more than 50% of human cancers including breast cancer. We have carried out a study on BRCA1 and BRCA2 along with p53 gene mutations in both sporadic as well as familial breast cancer patients from India where breast cancer is fast emerging as a major cancer among premenopausal urban women. We examined 124 untreated primary breast cancer patients comprising 100 sporadic and 24 familial cases including 56 age-matched healthy controls for the presence of BRCA1, BRCA2 and the p53 gene mutations using PCR-SSCP and direct nucleotide sequencing. Certain frequently mutated exons such as 2, 5, 11, 13 and 20 of BRCA1, exons 2, 9, 11 (for 6174delT), 18 and 20 of BRCA2 and 4-9 exons of p53 gene were analyzed in sporadic breast cancer while all 22 coding exons of BRCA1 including its flanking intronic regions along with above mentioned exons of BRCA2 and p53 gene were analyzed in familial breast cancer patients. We identified six patients (25%) with BRCA1 mutation of which three were found to be of novel type one in exon 16 (4956insG) and two in exon 7 (Lys110Thr) (Ser114Pro) out of 24 familial breast cancer patients studied from two different geographic regions/populations of India. Two sisters from a single family (12.5%) out of eight families from Goa with Portuguese colonial origin showed presence of founder Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1 mutation (185delAG) along with (IVS7 561-34T>C; IVS18 5271 + 66G > A). While from New Delhi, four (25%) of 16 breast cancer families showed BRCA1 mutations; a frame shift protein truncating (4956insG), a transition nonsense (Gln1395Stop) and two amino acid substitutions (Lys110Thr) and (Ser114Pro). Only one (4%) p53 mutation (Val97Ile) in its exon 4 along with BRCA1 mutation (4956insG) could be detected. No major sequence variation in BRCA2 gene was observed except for G203A at 5' UTR of exon 2, a common population polymorphism in two Goan patients who also showed silent nucleotide change for amino acid serine at codon 1436 of BRCA1 gene. None of the 100 sporadic breast cancer patients revealed any protein truncating or deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation. Interestingly, three (3%) p53 mutations in its exon 5 were detected in sporadic breast cancer patients. Although three novel BRCA1 mutations including a founder Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1 mutation were recorded in Indian women with familial breast cancer, the overall prevalence of BRCA gene mutations in Indian women with a family history of breast cancer appears to be low.

21343334
Dominant-negative features of mutant TP53 in germline carriers have limited impact on cancer outcomes
Germline TP53 mutations result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni-like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. To explore genotype/phenotype associations, we previously adopted a functional classification of all germline TP53 mutant alleles based on transactivation. Severe deficiency (SD) alleles were associated with more severe cancer proneness syndromes, and a larger number of tumors, compared with partial deficiency (PD) alleles. Because mutant p53 can exert dominant-negative (DN) effects, we addressed the relationship between DN and clinical manifestations. We reasoned that DN effects might be stronger in familial cancer cases associated with germline TP53 mutations, where mutant alleles coexist with the wild-type allele since conception. We examined 104 p53 mutant alleles with single amino acid substitutions described in the IARC germline database for (i) transactivation capability and (ii) capacity to reduce the activity of the wild-type allele (i.e., DN effect) using a quantitative yeast-based assay. The functional classifications of p53 alleles were then related to clinical variables. We confirmed that a classification based on transactivation alone can identify familial cancer cases with more severe clinical features. Classification based on DN effects allowed us to highlight similar associations but did not reveal distinct clinical subclasses of SD alleles, except for a correlation with tumor tissue prevalence. We conclude that in carriers of germline TP53 mutations transactivation-based classification of TP53 alleles appears more important for genotype/phenotype correlations than DN effects and that haplo-insufficiency of the TP53 gene is an important factor in cancer proneness in humans.

25896519
Germline TP53 variants and susceptibility to osteosarcoma
The etiologic contribution of germline genetic variation to sporadic osteosarcoma is not well understood. Osteosarcoma is a sentinel cancer of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), in which approximately 70% of families meeting the classic criteria have germline TP53 mutations. We sequenced TP53 exons in 765 osteosarcoma cases. Data were analyzed with χ(2) tests, logistic regression, and Cox proportional hazards regression models. We observed a high frequency of young osteosarcoma cases (age <30 years) carrying a known LFS- or likely LFS-associated mutation (3.8%) or rare exonic variant (5.7%) with an overall frequency of 9.5%, compared with none in case patients age 30 years and older (P < .001). This high TP53 mutation prevalence in young osteosarcoma cases is statistically significantly greater than the previously reported prevalence of 3% (P = .0024). We identified a novel association between a TP53 rare variant and metastasis at diagnosis of osteosarcoma (rs1800372, odds ratio = 4.27, 95% confidence interval = 1.2 to 15.5, P = .026). Genetic susceptibility to young onset osteosarcoma is distinct from older adult onset osteosarcoma, with a high frequency of LFS-associated and rare exonic TP53 variants.

17224268
Germline mutations of TP53 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer/sarcoma families
The genetic aetiology of familial aggregations of breast cancer and sarcomas has been elucidated only in part. In this study, 23 unrelated individuals from families with one case of sarcoma and at least one case of breast cancer were screened for mutations in the TP53, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Families were classified according to their conformity to the criteria defining the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndrome and hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). Germline TP53 mutations were identified in three instances (13%), including one LFS and two LFL families, while none of the non-LFS/non-LFL families had a TP53 mutation. Three cases (13%), including one with a TP53 mutation, carried BRCA2 mutations. Of these, two were observed in LFL/HBOC families and the other one in a non-LFS/non-LFL/HBOC family, while none of the non-HBOC families tested positive. These findings suggest that the screening of BRCA2, in addition to TP53, may be appropriate for the molecular characterisation of breast cancer/sarcoma families, with practical implications for counselling and clinical management.

29070607
Contribution of de novo and mosaic TP53 mutations to Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Development of tumours such as adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC), choroid plexus tumours (CPT) or female breast cancers before age 31 or multiple primary cancers belonging to the Li-Fraumeni (LFS) spectrum is, independently of the familial history, highly suggestive of a germline TP53 mutation. The aim of this study was to determine the contribution of de novo and mosaic mutations to LFS.

26681312
Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variant prevalence among the first 10,000 patients referred for next-generation cancer panel testing
Purpose:
        
      
      Germ-line testing for panels of cancer genes using next-generation sequencing is becoming more common in clinical care. We report our experience as a clinical laboratory testing both well-established, high-risk cancer genes (e.g., BRCA1/2, MLH1, MSH2) as well as more recently identified cancer genes (e.g., PALB2, BRIP1), many of which have increased but less well-defined penetrance.

15381368
Identification of novel TP53 mutations in familial and sporadic cancer cases of German and Swiss origin
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the TP53 gene. A number of tumor-associated germline mutations have been described in individuals from various ethnic origins although, thus far, none in affected individuals of German descent. Our work aimed to detect germline mutations in the TP53 gene in five index cases of German and Swiss origin with cancers typical of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We analyzed all ten coding exons of the TP53 gene by direct sequencing of PCR products. We identified five mutations of which three were found in families with a strong history of LFS in several generations while two likely came about de novo. The five mutations include two missense mutations in exon 4 (Gly105Cys) and exon 7 (Arg248Gln), one deletion of 11 base pairs encompassing the splice acceptor sequence of exon 6 (IVS5-11_-1 del), one nonsense mutation in exon 6 (Arg196Stop), and one duplication of 4 base pairs in exon 8 (1020_1023dupCTGC). The functional consequence of the IVS5-11_-1del mutation on splicing of pre-mRNA was investigated by an in vitro assay. Our study reports the first germline mutations in patients of German and Swiss origin with LFS-related tumors. The frequent identification of de novo germline mutations emphasizes the importance of mutational analyses of the TP53 gene particularly in young patients with malignancies typical for LFS, but without a positive family history of this tumor syndrome.

29470806
Screening of over 1000 Indian patients with breast and/or ovarian cancer with a multi-gene panel: prevalence of BRCA1/2 and non-BRCA mutations
Purpose:
        
      
      Breast and/or ovarian cancers are among the most common cancers in women across the world. In the Indian population, the healthcare burden of breast and/or ovarian cancers has been steadily rising, thus stressing the need for early detection, surveillance, and disease management measures. However, the burden attributable to inherited mutations is not well characterized.

11518751
Germline p53 mutation in a patient with multiple primary cancers
We report a case of multiple primary cancers having a germline missense mutation of the p53 gene. The patient was a Japanese female and had a history of five different types of cancers. PCR/direct sequencing analysis revealed the presence of a nucleotide substitution, AGC (Ser) to AGG (Arg), at codon 106 of the p53 gene in DNA from non-cancerous breast tissue. This is the first case of germline p53 mutation at codon 106, and could contribute to establishing correlations between the types and locations of germline p53 mutations and their phenotypical consequences.

26580448
Germline Mutations in Predisposition Genes in Pediatric Cancer
Background:
        
      
      The prevalence and spectrum of predisposing mutations among children and adolescents with cancer are largely unknown. Knowledge of such mutations may improve the understanding of tumorigenesis, direct patient care, and enable genetic counseling of patients and families.

30352134
Variable population prevalence estimates of germline TP53 variants: A gnomAD-based analysis
Reports of variable cancer penetrance in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) have raised questions regarding the prevalence of pathogenic germline TP53 variants. We previously reported higher-than-expected population prevalence estimates in sequencing databases composed of individuals unselected for cancer history. This study aimed to expand and further evaluate the prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic germline TP53 variants in the gnomAD dataset (version r2.0.2, n = 138,632). Variants were selected and classified based on our previously published algorithm and compared with alternative estimates based on three different classification databases: ClinVar, HGMD, and the UMD_TP53 database. Conservative prevalence estimates of pathogenic and likely pathogenic TP53 variants were within the range of one carrier in 3,555-5,476 individuals. Less stringent classification increased the approximate prevalence to one carrier in every 400-865 individuals, mainly due to the inclusion of the controvertible p.N235S, p.V31I, and p.R290H variants. This study shows a higher-than-expected population prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic germline TP53 variants even with the most conservative estimates. However, these estimates may not necessarily reflect the prevalence of the classical LFS phenotype, which is based upon family history of cancer. Comprehensive approaches are needed to better understand the interplay of germline TP53 variant classification, prevalence estimates, cancer penetrance, and LFS-associated phenotype.

25877891
Personalized genomic analyses for cancer mutation discovery and interpretation
Massively parallel sequencing approaches are beginning to be used clinically to characterize individual patient tumors and to select therapies based on the identified mutations. A major question in these analyses is the extent to which these methods identify clinically actionable alterations and whether the examination of the tumor tissue alone is sufficient or whether matched normal DNA should also be analyzed to accurately identify tumor-specific (somatic) alterations. To address these issues, we comprehensively evaluated 815 tumor-normal paired samples from patients of 15 tumor types. We identified genomic alterations using next-generation sequencing of whole exomes or 111 targeted genes that were validated with sensitivities >95% and >99%, respectively, and specificities >99.99%. These analyses revealed an average of 140 and 4.3 somatic mutations per exome and targeted analysis, respectively. More than 75% of cases had somatic alterations in genes associated with known therapies or current clinical trials. Analyses of matched normal DNA identified germline alterations in cancer-predisposing genes in 3% of patients with apparently sporadic cancers. In contrast, a tumor-only sequencing approach could not definitively identify germline changes in cancer-predisposing genes and led to additional false-positive findings comprising 31% and 65% of alterations identified in targeted and exome analyses, respectively, including in potentially actionable genes. These data suggest that matched tumor-normal sequencing analyses are essential for precise identification and interpretation of somatic and germline alterations and have important implications for the diagnostic and therapeutic management of cancer patients.

32658311
Germline pathogenic variant spectrum in 25 cancer susceptibility genes in Turkish breast and colorectal cancer patients and elderly controls
Inherited pathogenic variants account for 5% to 10% of all breast cancer (BC) and colorectal cancer (CRC) cases. Here, we sought to profile the pathogenic variants in 25 cancer susceptibility genes in Turkish population. Germline pathogenic variants were screened in 732 BC patients, 189 CRC patients and 490 cancer-free elderly controls, using next-generation sequencing-based multigene panel testing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification testing. Pathogenic variants were detected in 17.2% of high-risk BC patients and 26.4% of high-risk CRC patients. More than 95% of these variants were clinically actionable. BRCA1/2 and mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6) accounted for two-thirds of all pathogenic variants detected in high-risk BC and CRC patients, respectively. Pathogenic variants in PALB2, CHEK2, ATM and TP53 were also prevalent in high-risk BC patients (4.5%). BRCA1 exons 17-18 deletion and CHEK2 c.592+3A>T were the most common variants predisposing to BC, and they are likely to be founder variants. Three frequent MUTYH pathogenic variants (c.884C>T, c.1437_1439delGGA and c.1187G>A) were responsible for all MUTYH biallelic cases (4.4% of high-risk CRC patients). The total pathogenic variant frequency was very low in controls (2.4%) and in low-risk BC (3.9%) and CRC (6.1%) patients. Our study depicts the pathogenic variant spectrum and prevalence in Turkish BC and CRC patients, guiding clinicians and health authorities for genetic testing applications and variant classification in Turkish population.

28369373
Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutations of TP53, encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to DNA damage. We have recently shown, from a large LFS series, that dominant-negative missense mutations are the most clinically severe and, thanks to a new p53 functional assay in lymphocytes, that they alter the p53 transcriptional response to DNA damage more drastically than null mutations. In this study, we first confirmed this observation by performing the p53 functional assay in lymphocytes from 56 TP53 mutation carriers harbouring 35 distinct alterations. Then, to compare the impact of the different types of germline TP53 mutations on DNA binding, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin. ChIP-Seq performed in wild-type TP53 control lymphocytes accurately mapped 1287 p53-binding sites. New p53-binding sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-Seq analysis of LFS lymphocytes carrying TP53 null mutations (p.P152Rfs*18 or complete deletion) or the low penetrant 'Brazilian' p.R337H mutation revealed a moderate decrease of p53-binding sites (949, 580 and 620, respectively) and of ChIP-Seq peak depths. In contrast, analysis of LFS lymphocytes with TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations p.R273H or p.R248W revealed only 310 and 143 p53-binding sites, respectively, and the depths of the corresponding peaks were drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that TP53 mutation carriers exhibit a constitutive defect of the transcriptional response to DNA damage and that the clinical severity of TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations is explained by a massive and global alteration of p53 DNA binding.

29392648
The first two confirmed sub-Saharan African families with germline TP53 mutations causing Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare inherited cancer syndrome characterised by the early onset of specific cancers. Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is associated with germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, TP53. This study reports the first cases of molecularly confirmed LFS germline mutations in sub-Saharan Africa. Three black African patients, all with LFS-associated cancers, were seen through the Clinical and Counselling Section of the Division of Human Genetics at the National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa, during 2011-2012. All three patients (two were related) were recruited into this research study. Sequence analysis of the coding region of the TP53 gene identified a Class IV (likely pathogenic) variant, c.326T > C (p.Phe109Ser), in the two related patients, and a known pathogenic mutation, c.1010G > A (p.Arg337His), also referred to as the Brazilian founder mutation, in the other patient. A confirmed diagnosis in these patients will assist in tailored medical management (it is recommended that individuals carrying a germline TP53 mutation avoid radiotherapy as this might cause secondary radiotherapy-induced malignancies) and in addition, genetic testing of at-risk family members can be offered. Very little is known and documented on LFS in African individuals. Despite the small number of patients in this study, the results support the need for diagnostic genetic testing for LFS in South Africa.

30630526
Germline TP53 and MSH6 mutations implicated in sporadic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC): a preliminary study
Background:
        
      
      Germline BRCA1/2 prevalence is relatively low in sporadic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). We hypothesized that non-BRCA genes may also have significant germline contribution to Chinese sporadic TNBC, and the somatic mutational landscape of TNBC may vary between ethnic groups. We therefore conducted this study to investigate germline and somatic mutations in 43 cancer susceptibility genes in Chinese sporadic TNBC.

31081129
Functional characterization of novel germline TP53 variants in Swedish families
Pathogenic germline TP53 variants predispose to a wide range of early onset cancers, often recognized as the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). They are also identified in 1% of families with hereditary breast cancer (HrBC) that do not fulfill the criteria for LFS. In this study, we present a total of 24 different TP53 variants identified in 31 Swedish families with LFS or HrBC. Ten of these variants, nine exonic and one splice, have previously not been described as germline pathogenic variants. The nine exonic variants were functionally characterized and demonstrated partial transactivation activity compared to wild-type p53. Some show nuclear localization similar to wild-type p53 while others possess cytoplasmic or perinuclear localization. The four frameshift variants (W91Gfs*32, L111 Wfs*12, S227 Lfs*20 and S240Kfs*25) had negligible, while F134 L and T231del had low level of p53 activity. The L111 Wfs*12 and T231del variants are also deficient for induction of apoptosis. The missense variant R110C retain p53 effects and the nonsense E349* shows at least partial transcription factor activity but has reduced ability to trigger apoptosis. This is the first functional characterization of novel germline TP53 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in the Swedish cohort as an attempt to understand its association with LFS and HrBC, respectively.

23580068
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in HER2+ breast cancer patients
Breast cancer is the most frequent tumor in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a rare inherited cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Recent data show that breast cancer in germline TP53 mutation carriers is commonly HER2+ (63-83 %). We assessed the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a cohort of women with HER2+ breast cancer diagnosed age ≤50 years. We identified blood specimens from 213 women with primary invasive HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years from a single center. Exon grouping analysis sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification techniques were used to screen for germline TP53 mutations. Among 213 women with HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years, 3 (ages at diagnosis 23, 32, 44 years) were found to carry a TP53 mutation (1.4 %, 95 % CI 0.3-4.1 %). ER/PR status was not uniform. Two TP53 carriers met Chompret criteria for LFS; none met classic LFS criteria. Although two-thirds of breast cancers in women with TP53 mutations are HER2+, we observed a low prevalence of germline TP53 mutations among unselected young women with HER2+ breast cancer. Given the potential clinical impact, consideration of germline TP53 testing should be given to young women with HER2+ breast cancer, especially if family cancer history is notable.

31016814
Concern regarding classification of germline TP53 variants as likely pathogenic


9667734
Comprehensive mutational scanning of the p53 coding region by two-dimensional gene scanning
A comprehensive mutational scanning test for the p53 coding region based on multiplex PCR and two-dimensional DNA electrophoresis was designed and evaluated. In a 2-step multiplex PCR, the p53 coding region (exons 2-11) was amplified as a single 8646-bp fragment by long-distance PCR in step one. This fragment served as a template for the subsequent co-amplification of the individual exons in two multiplex groups in step two. The multiplex products were then separated, first on the basis of size in non-denaturant polyacrylamide gels and then on the basis of sequence by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Primers for optimal PCR, melting behavior and 2-D gel distribution were designed using a recently developed computer program. The resulting two-dimensional gene scanning (TDGS) test was evaluated by screening, in a blinded fashion, 29 coded DNA samples from Li-Fraumeni syndrome patients with previously identified germline mutations. All mutations were correctly detected. This assay provides an accurate, cost-effective and non-radioactive method for simultaneous mutational scanning of all p53 coding exons.

28152038
Exome sequencing covers >98% of mutations identified on targeted next generation sequencing panels
Background:
        
      
      With the expanded availability of next generation sequencing (NGS)-based clinical genetic tests, clinicians seeking to test patients with Mendelian diseases must weigh the superior coverage of targeted gene panels with the greater number of genes included in whole exome sequencing (WES) when considering their first-tier testing approach. Here, we use an in silico analysis to predict the analytic sensitivity of WES using pathogenic variants identified on targeted NGS panels as a reference.

21552135
Gastric cancer in individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Purpose:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare hereditary cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Although sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemias, breast and adrenal cortical carcinomas are typically recognized as Li-Fraumeni syndrome-associated tumors, the occurrence of gastrointestinal neoplasms has not been fully evaluated. In this analysis, we investigated the frequency and characteristics of gastric cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

23894400
High frequency of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective adult-onset sarcoma cohort
Sarcomas are a key feature of Li-Fraumeni and related syndromes (LFS/LFL), associated with germline TP53 mutations. Current penetrance estimates for TP53 mutations are subject to significant ascertainment bias. The International Sarcoma Kindred Study is a clinic-based, prospective cohort of adult-onset sarcoma cases, without regard to family history. The entire cohort was screened for mutations in TP53 using high-resolution melting analysis and Sanger sequencing, and multiplex-ligation-dependent probe amplification and targeted massively parallel sequencing for copy number changes. Pathogenic TP53 mutations were detected in blood DNA of 20/559 sarcoma probands (3.6%); 17 were germline and 3 appeared to be somatically acquired. Of the germline carriers, one appeared to be mosaic, detectable in the tumor and blood, but not epithelial tissues. Germline mutation carriers were more likely to have multiple cancers (47% vs 15% for non-carriers, P = 3.0×10(-3)), and earlier cancer onset (33 vs 48 years, P = 1.19×10(-3)). The median survival of mutation carriers following first cancer diagnosis was not significantly different from non-carriers. Only 10/17 (59%) pedigrees met classical or Chompret criteria for LFS. In summary, germline TP53 mutations are not rare in adult patients with sarcoma, with implications for screening, surveillance, treatment and genetic counselling of carriers and family members.

33674644
Prevalence of germline pathogenic variants in 22 cancer susceptibility genes in Swedish pediatric cancer patients
Up to 10% of pediatric cancer patients harbor pathogenic germline variants in one or more cancer susceptibility genes. A recent study from the US reported pathogenic variants in 22 out of 60 analyzed autosomal dominant cancer susceptibility genes, implicating 8.5% of pediatric cancer patients. Here we aimed to assess the prevalence of germline pathogenic variants in these 22 genes in a population-based Swedish cohort and to compare the results to those described in other populations. We found pathogenic variants in 10 of the 22 genes covering 3.8% of these patients. The prevalence of TP53 mutations was significantly lower than described in previous studies, which can largely be attributed to differences in tumor diagnosis distributions across the three cohorts. Matched family history for relatives allowed assessment of familial cancer incidence, however, no significant difference in cancer incidence was found in families of children carrying pathogenic variants compared to those who did not.

1565143
Prevalence and spectrum of germline mutations of the p53 gene among patients with sarcoma
Background:
        
      
      Recent studies have identified germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of sarcomas of bone and soft tissue, breast cancer, and other tumors. In this report, we address the possibility that some sporadic sarcomas may be associated with new germline mutations of the p53 gene, which would not be manifested as familial cancer unless the patient survived to reproduce.

32658383
Rhabdomyosarcoma associated with germline TP53 alteration in children and adolescents: The French experience
Objective:
        
      
      To describe the clinical characteristics and outcome of patients with Li-Fraumeni-associated rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).

31119730
Prevalence and clinical impact of TP53 germline mutations in Chinese women with breast cancer
The prevalence and clinical relevance of TP53 germline mutations in a large unselected breast cancer series are largely unknown. Here, we determined TP53 germline mutations in a large cohort of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients through multigene panel-based next-generation and/or Sanger sequencing assays. We found that 0.5% of patients (50 cases) carried a pathogenic TP53 germline mutation in this large series of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients, and the prevalence of TP53 germline mutation was 3.8% in very early onset breast cancer (age ≤30 years) in this large cohort. TP53 mutation carriers were significantly more likely to have early onset cancer (p < 0.001) and bilateral breast cancer (p = 0.03), they and were significantly more likely to respond to carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared to anthracycline- or taxane-based regimen in terms of pathologic complete response (50% vs. 0%, p = 0.006). At the median follow-up of 54 months, TP53 mutation was an independent unfavorable factor for recurrence-free survival (RFS), distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS), and overall survival (OS) (RFS, adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 2.24, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.15-4.33, p = 0.02; DRFS, adjusted HR: 2.73, 95% CI: 1.41-5.30, p = 0.003; OS, adjusted HR: 4.60, 95% CI: 2.26-9.41, p < 0.001) in multivariate analyses. Our study suggested that TP53 germline mutations occur more frequently in very early onset unselected breast cancer patients; and TP53 germline mutation carriers have a very poor survival and may benefit from carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in unselected breast cancer patients.

22233476
Childhood adrenocortical carcinoma as a sentinel cancer for detecting families with germline TP53 mutations
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant, autosomal dominant disorder where affected individuals carry a 50% risk of developing cancer before 30 years of age. It is most commonly associated with mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, TP53. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a very rare paediatric cancer, and up to 80% of affected children are found to carry germline TP53 mutations. Hence, we propose using childhood ACC incidence as selection criteria for referral for TP53 mutation testing, independent of familial cancer history. Under the auspices of the Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology-Oncology, four eligible children diagnosed with ACC over a 30-month study period were referred for mutation testing. Three had a germline TP53 mutation. Subsequent TP53 testing in relatives showed two inherited mutations and one de novo mutation. These findings strongly support paediatric ACC as a useful sentinel cancer for initiating a germline TP53/LFS detection programme, particularly in countries where the lack of structured oncogenetic practice precludes the identification of families with LFS features.

20127978
Genetic diagnosis of familial breast cancer using clonal sequencing
Using conventional Sanger sequencing as a reference standard, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, and capacity of the Illumina GA II platform for the detection of TP53, BRCA1, and BRCA2 mutations in established tumor cell lines and DNA from patients with germline mutations. A total of 656 coding variants were identified in four cell lines and 65 patient DNAs. All of the known pathogenic mutations (including point mutations and insertions/deletions of up to 16 nucleotides) were identified, using a combination of the Illumina data analysis pipeline with custom and commercial sequence alignment software. In our configuration, clonal sequencing outperforms current diagnostic methods, providing a reduction in analysis times and in reagent costs compared with conventional sequencing. These improvements open the possibility of BRCA1/2 testing for a wider spectrum of at-risk women, and will allow the genetic classification of tumors prior to the use of novel PARP inhibitors to treat BRCA-deficient breast cancers.

29753700
Spectrum and prevalence of genetic predisposition in medulloblastoma: a retrospective genetic study and prospective validation in a clinical trial cohort
Background:
        
      
      Medulloblastoma is associated with rare hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes; however, consensus medulloblastoma predisposition genes have not been defined and screening guidelines for genetic counselling and testing for paediatric patients are not available. We aimed to assess and define these genes to provide evidence for future screening guidelines.

25503501
Prevalence of mutations in a panel of breast cancer susceptibility genes in BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Clinical testing for germ-line variation in multiple cancer susceptibility genes is available using massively parallel sequencing. Limited information is available for pretest genetic counseling regarding the spectrum of mutations and variants of uncertain significance in defined patient populations.

26014290
Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of the study was to update the description of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a remarkable cancer predisposition characterized by extensive clinical heterogeneity.

22006311
Mutations in 12 genes for inherited ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal carcinoma identified by massively parallel sequencing
Inherited loss-of-function mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and other tumor suppressor genes predispose to ovarian carcinomas, but the overall burden of disease due to inherited mutations is not known. Using targeted capture and massively parallel genomic sequencing, we screened for germ-line mutations in 21 tumor suppressor genes in genomic DNA from women with primary ovarian, peritoneal, or fallopian tube carcinoma. Subjects were consecutively enrolled at diagnosis and not selected for age or family history. All classes of mutations, including point mutations and large genomic deletions and insertions, were detected. Of 360 subjects, 24% carried germ-line loss-of-function mutations: 18% in BRCA1 or BRCA2 and 6% in BARD1, BRIP1, CHEK2, MRE11A, MSH6, NBN, PALB2, RAD50, RAD51C, or TP53. Six of these genes were not previously implicated in inherited ovarian carcinoma. Primary carcinomas were generally characterized by genomic loss of normal alleles of the mutant genes. Of women with inherited mutations, >30% had no family history of breast or ovarian carcinoma, and >35% were 60 y or older at diagnosis. More patients with ovarian carcinoma carry cancer-predisposing mutations and in more genes than previously appreciated. Comprehensive genetic testing for inherited carcinoma is warranted for all women with ovarian, peritoneal, or fallopian tube carcinoma, regardless of age or family history. Clinical genetic testing is currently done gene by gene, with each test costing thousands of dollars. In contrast, massively parallel sequencing allows such testing for many genes simultaneously at low cost.

24651015
Genome sequencing of SHH medulloblastoma predicts genotype-related response to smoothened inhibition
Smoothened (SMO) inhibitors recently entered clinical trials for sonic-hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma (SHH-MB). Clinical response is highly variable. To understand the mechanism(s) of primary resistance and identify pathways cooperating with aberrant SHH signaling, we sequenced and profiled a large cohort of SHH-MBs (n = 133). SHH pathway mutations involved PTCH1 (across all age groups), SUFU (infants, including germline), and SMO (adults). Children >3 years old harbored an excess of downstream MYCN and GLI2 amplifications and frequent TP53 mutations, often in the germline, all of which were rare in infants and adults. Functional assays in different SHH-MB xenograft models demonstrated that SHH-MBs harboring a PTCH1 mutation were responsive to SMO inhibition, whereas tumors harboring an SUFU mutation or MYCN amplification were primarily resistant.

30154229
Intensive Surveillance with Biannual Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging Downstages Breast Cancer in BRCA1 Mutation Carriers
Purpose:
        
      
      To establish a cohort of high-risk women undergoing intensive surveillance for breast cancer.Experimental Design: We performed dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI every 6 months in conjunction with annual mammography (MG). Eligible participants had a cumulative lifetime breast cancer risk ≥20% and/or tested positive for a pathogenic mutation in a known breast cancer susceptibility gene.

23334668
The genomic landscape of hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia
The genetic basis of hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), a subtype of ALL characterized by aneuploidy and poor outcome, is unknown. Genomic profiling of 124 hypodiploid ALL cases, including whole-genome and exome sequencing of 40 cases, identified two subtypes that differ in the severity of aneuploidy, transcriptional profiles and submicroscopic genetic alterations. Near-haploid ALL with 24-31 chromosomes harbor alterations targeting receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and Ras signaling (71%) and the lymphoid transcription factor gene IKZF3 (encoding AIOLOS; 13%). In contrast, low-hypodiploid ALL with 32-39 chromosomes are characterized by alterations in TP53 (91.2%) that are commonly present in nontumor cells, IKZF2 (encoding HELIOS; 53%) and RB1 (41%). Both near-haploid and low-hypodiploid leukemic cells show activation of Ras-signaling and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-signaling pathways and are sensitive to PI3K inhibitors, indicating that these drugs should be explored as a new therapeutic strategy for this aggressive form of leukemia.

11332399
Sensitivity and predictive value of criteria for p53 germline mutation screening


19468865
TP53 germline mutations in Portugal and genetic modifiers of age at cancer onset
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant disease caused by TP53 germline mutations. This study aimed to characterize the TP53 mutational spectrum in patients suspected to have LFS in Portugal and to evaluate the influence of the MDM2-SNP309 and TP53-72Arg variants and of telomere length on age of tumor onset. Probands were primarily selected using the classical LFS criteria (two cases) or the more sensitive Chompret Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) criteria (13 cases), but 12 additional patients that did not comply with those LFS or LFL criteria were included in the analysis based on clinical suspicion (LFS suspects). Nine of the 27 probands (33.3%) presented germline TP53 mutations, two of them occurring de novo and two of them being novel. Three of the nine TP53 mutations were found in families that did not comply with any of the commonly used criteria for TP53 testing, leaving room to recommend the use of less stringent criteria. An association was found between the presence of the TP53-72Arg (but not the MDM2-SNP309) variant and earlier age of onset in TP53 carriers. A negative correlation between telomere length and age of cancer onset was found in patients with germline TP53 mutation, whereas no such correlation was found in controls or in patients with wild-type TP53.

23484829
Increased oxidative metabolism in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome
There is growing evidence that alterations in metabolism may contribute to tumorigenesis. Here, we report on members of families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome who carry germline mutations in TP53, the gene encoding the tumor-suppressor protein p53. As compared with family members who are not carriers and with healthy volunteers, family members with these mutations have increased oxidative phosphorylation of skeletal muscle. Basic experimental studies of tissue samples from patients with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome and a mouse model of the syndrome support this in vivo finding of increased mitochondrial function. These results suggest that p53 regulates bioenergetic homeostasis in humans. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the National Institutes of Health; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00406445.).

19127094
A novel TP53 germline mutation in a family with a history of multiple malignancies: case report and review of the literature
Objective:
        
      
      Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) has been associated with TP53 germline mutations and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). We describe our finding of a novel germline mutation in the TP53 gene in a family with multiple malignancies and in association with a child presenting with CPC.

29263802
Inherited breast cancer predisposition in Asians: multigene panel testing outcomes from Singapore
Genetic testing for germline mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes can potentially identify individuals at a high risk of developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. There is a paucity of such mutational information for Asians. Panel testing of 25 cancer susceptibility genes and BRCA1/2 deletion/duplication analysis was performed for 220 Asian breast cancer patients or their family members referred for genetics risk assessment. All 220 participants had at least one high-risk feature: having a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer in first- and/or second-degree relatives; having breast and ovarian cancer in the same individual or bilateral breast cancer; having early-onset breast cancer or ovarian cancer (⩽40 years of age). We identified 67 pathogenic variants in 66 (30.0%) patients. Of these, 19 (28.3%) occurred in BRCA1, 16 (23.9%) in BRCA2, 7 (10.4%) in PALB2, 6 (9.0%) in TP53, 2 (3.0%) in PTEN, 2 (3.0%) in CDH1 and 15 (22.4%) in other predisposition genes. Notably, 47.8% of pathogenic variants were in non-BRCA1/2 genes. Of the 66 patients with pathogenic mutations, 63.6% (42/66) were under the age of 40 years. Family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer is enriched in patients with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants but less predictive for non-BRCA1/2 related pathogenic variations. We detected a median of three variants of unknown significance (VUS) per gene (range 0-21). Custom gene panel testing is feasible and useful for the detection of pathogenic mutations and should be done in the setting of a formal clinical cancer genetics service given the rate of VUS.

18989156
Germline p53 mutation in a Micronesian child with adrenocortical carcinoma and subsequent osteosarcoma
In 1990, an 18-month-old Micronesian girl was initially diagnosed with a right adrenocortical carcinoma. More than a decade later (2003), she was diagnosed with metastatic osteosarcoma with the primary in her right proximal fibula. Given this child's remarkable history of malignancy, she underwent testing for a genetic mutation that is associated with increased cancer formation. One such cancer syndrome is called Li-Fraumeni syndrome where approximately 70% of patients carry a genetic mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Patients with LFS are at risk for developing cancers of the breast, soft tissues, brain, bone, adrenal gland, and blood cells. Mutational analysis of our patient did reveal the presence of a germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. She was found to have a base pair change (A-->C) at nucleotide 394 resulting in a lysine to glutamine amino acid change at codon 132 (K132Q), which remarkably has never been described in association with either adrenocortical carcinoma or osteosarcoma.

9157982
DNA damage-associated dysregulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis control in cells with germ-line p53 mutation
Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) with heterozygous p53 mutations at residues 286A, 133R, 282W, 132E, and 213ter were established from five independent Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. When cell cycle regulation in response to gamma-irradiation was studied, these LCLs showed an abnormal G1 checkpoint associated with defective inhibition of cyclin E/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity in all cases except for 282W LCL, which showed a normal G1 checkpoint. On the other hand, the control of S-phase-G2 as determined by cyclin A/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity was defective in all these LCLs. The mitotic checkpoint was also defective in the two LCLs analyzed as either competent or incompetent for G1 arrest. When radiation-induced apoptosis, which requires wild-type p53 function under optimal conditions, was studied, all of these LCLs showed significant failure compared to normal LCLs. These findings indicate that although p53-dependent transactivation and G1-S-phase cell cycle control are variably dysregulated, the induction of apoptosis and control of the cell cycle at S-phase-G2 and the mitotic checkpoint in response to DNA-damaging agents are consistently dysregulated in heterozygous mutant LCLs. This suggests that these dysfunctions underlie, at least in part, the susceptibility of Li-Fraumeni syndrome families to cancer. Furthermore, the approach presented is a potentially useful method for studying individual carriers of different germ-line p53 mutations and different biological features.

9020384
Germline p53 mutation at codon 133 in a cancer-prone family
We identified four families in which we suspected the presence of genetic factors predisposing them to cancer. We examined one family with features suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome for the presence of a germline p53 mutation in 13 of its members. To detect germline p53 mutations we performed polymerase chain reaction/nonradioisotopic single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing analysis on exons 4-9 of the p53 gene. Mutated polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was also performed on exon 5 to confirm the mutation identified by the sequencing analysis. A novel germline p53 mutation was identified at codon 133 (ATG-->AGG) in exon 5, resulting in the substitution of arginine for methionine, in all four cancer-affected individuals and in three apparently healthy individuals. We also analyzed tumor specimens for additional p53 mutations in the wild-type alleles using the same methods. However, heterozygosity was retained, and no other additional mutations in the wild-type allele were identified in any of the tumor tissues. It is possible that additional mutations in the wild-type allele are not always necessary for the loss of tumor suppressor functions. This study presents serious clinical and ethical problems about the predictive value of identifying germline p53 mutations in presymptomatic carriers. However, accurate predictive testing will be very useful in identifying unaffected individuals who are at increased risk of developing cancer and in detecting cancer at an early stage.

19367569
Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome mutations in p53 are associated with exonic methylation and splicing regulatory elements
Mutations in codon 133 of p53, which cause the loss of the Delta 133 isoform(s) expression, are very frequent in the Li-Fraumeni (LF) and Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. In sporadic cancers, silent p53 mutations are correlated with exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and exonic methylated sites. The present study shows that mutations in splice sites are also very frequent in LF/LFL syndromes, while missense mutations are less common compared to other familial or sporadic cancers (P = 0 in both cases). Furthermore, it is shown that the codons at which LF/LFL germline missense mutations occur, correlate with CpG-containing ESEs (r = 0.181, P = 0.014) which are all methylated in p53. While both silent and LF/LFL missense mutations correlate with SC35 motifs, only the latter are associated with SRp55. On the contrary, only silent mutations in sporadic cancers correlate with SF2/ASF motifs in p53. Moreover, 12.1% of LF/LFL missense mutations involve the formation of potential splice sites of considerable splicing scores. Finally, mutations that are not at, or adjacent to CpGs (+/-1 codon, 34% of all LF/LFL mutated sites), introduce considerable changes of the ESE scores (>1.3 score change). The above data verify that LF/LFL missense mutations probably result also in splicing deregulation, in addition to any changes of the protein function and are mostly associated with alterations of the exonic methylation landscape. Some of the ESEs affected in LF/LFL syndromes are also genetically unstable in sporadic cancers but non-CpG cytosine instability, which is predominantly associated with specific ESEs, is only common in sporadic cancers.

1933902
A germ line mutation in exon 5 of the p53 gene in an extended cancer family
Germ line p53 point mutations have been reported for some families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a syndrome characterized by a dominantly inherited increased susceptibility for the development of early age of onset neoplasms of diverse origin in multiple family members. All of the initially reported p53 germ line mutations have been found exclusively within a single conserved, nonpolymorphic region of the gene between condons 245 and 258. The restricted distribution of these inherited mutations has led to speculation that germ line p53 mutations have unique properties [B. Vogelstein, Nature (Lond.), 348: 681-682, 1990]. We report here on the identification of a p53 germ line mutation at codon 133 (ATG----ACG) in nine members of an extended Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. This mutation leads to an amino acid substitution in the protein and is shown to completely cosegregate with Li-Fraumeni syndrome associated cancer in this family. Its location extends the region of the p53 gene where inherited mutations predisposing to cancer are observed and suggests that their distribution may be diverse.

10477429
TP53 mutation and haplotype analysis of two large African American families
Two large apparently unrelated African American families with a high incidence of breast cancer and other tumors characteristic of Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome were studied. Mutation screening revealed that in both families the affected members carried a germline mutation of the TP53 gene at codon 133 (ATG--> ACG, M133T). In order to determine whether an ancestral haplotype was shared by these two families, polymorphic markers within and flanking the TP53 gene were studied. Haplotype analysis using five markers revealed an identical haplotype shared by the two families. Loss of heterozygosity at the TP53 locus in the probands' tumor tissues from each family was observed; in each case, the retained allele carried the common haplotype. The frequency of this haplotype in the general African American population is <0.003. This unique haplotype, combined with the rare TP53 mutation, suggests that these African American families share a common ancestry. This finding suggests that other African Americans may be carriers of this mutation and thus may be at risk of early-onset breast cancer or other cancers characteristic of the Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome. The finding of recurring mutations in African Americans may facilitate carrier screening and identification in this population.

18685109
Excessive genomic DNA copy number variation in the Li-Fraumeni cancer predisposition syndrome
DNA copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant and ubiquitous source of inherited human genetic variation. However, the importance of CNVs to cancer susceptibility and tumor progression has not yet been explored. Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized by a strikingly increased risk of early-onset breast cancer, sarcomas, brain tumors and other neoplasms in individuals harboring germline TP53 mutations. Known genetic determinants of LFS do not fully explain the variable clinical phenotype in affected family members. As part of a wider study of CNVs and cancer, we conducted a genome-wide profile of germline CNVs in LFS families. Here, by examining DNA from a large healthy population and an LFS cohort using high-density oligonucleotide arrays, we show that the number of CNVs per genome is well conserved in the healthy population, but strikingly enriched in these cancer-prone individuals. We found a highly significant increase in CNVs among carriers of germline TP53 mutations with a familial cancer history. Furthermore, we identified a remarkable number of genomic regions in which known cancer-related genes coincide with CNVs, in both LFS families and healthy individuals. Germline CNVs may provide a foundation that enables the more dramatic chromosomal changes characteristic of TP53-related tumors to be established. Our results suggest that screening families predisposed to cancer for CNVs may identify individuals with an abnormally high number of these events.

31050713
Germline-focussed analysis of tumour-only sequencing: recommendations from the ESMO Precision Medicine Working Group
It is increasingly common in oncology practice to perform tumour sequencing using large cancer panels. For pathogenic sequence variants in cancer susceptibility genes identified on tumour-only sequencing, it is often unclear whether they are of somatic or constitutional (germline) origin. There is wide-spread disparity regarding both the extent to which systematic 'germline-focussed analysis' is carried out upon tumour sequencing data and for which variants follow-up analysis of a germline sample is carried out. Here we present analyses of paired sequencing data from 17 152 cancer samples, in which 1494 pathogenic sequence variants were identified across 65 cancer susceptibility genes. From these analyses, the European Society of Medical Oncology Precision Medicine Working Group Germline Subgroup has generated (i) recommendations regarding germline-focussed analyses of tumour-only sequencing data, (ii) indications for germline follow-up testing and (iii) guidance on patient information-giving and consent.

16941491
Unique substitution of CHEK2 and TP53 mutations implicated in primary prostate tumors and cancer cell lines
Genetic defects in CHEK2 and TP53 have been implicated in prostate cancer development. However, the interaction of these two genes in prostate cancer tumorigenesis has not been investigated. We previously described 11 CHEK2 mutations in a group of 84 primary prostate tumors. In this report, we screened the same group of tumors for TP53 mutations and revealed nine somatic and two germline mutations. One germline TP53 mutation (c.408A > T/p.Gln136His) and two somatic mutations (c.1022T > G/p.Phe341Cys and c.108-109ins22/p.His37fsX13) are novel to human cancer. More interestingly, CHEK2 and TP53 mutations were observed to be mutually substituted in these tumors. Analysis of five commonly used prostate cancer cell lines revealed that four cell lines harboring TP53 mutations carry no CHEK2 mutation while the only cell line (LNCaP) carrying wild-type TP53 harbors a CHEK2 mutation. The novel CHEK2 mutation (c.1160C>T/p.Thr387Asn) identified in LNCaP cells changes amino acid Thr387 to Asn which has been shown to impair CHEK2 autophosphorylation and activation. Our data suggest that the CHEK2 and TP53 mutations can substitute each other in at least 25% (21/84) of prostate cancers and that DNA damage-signaling pathway plays an important role in prostate cancer tumorigenesis.

9242456
Germ-line mutations of TP53 in Li-Fraumeni families: an extended study of 39 families
We have previously reported on the analysis of TP53 coding mutations in 12 classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families plus 9 families that were Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) families (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994). Mutations were found in 6 of 12 LFS families and in 1 of 9 LFL families. We have now extended these studies to include an additional nine LFS and nine LFL families, and TP53 mutations have been detected in eight of nine LFS families and in three of nine LFL families. Six of the new mutations described here are the same as those previously identified in other Li-Fraumeni families and are missense mutations at codons 245, 248, and 273 (in two families); a nonsense mutation at codon 209; and a mutation at the splice donor site in exon 4. The other five mutations are novel germ-line mutations and include missense mutations at codons 136 and 344, a 2-bp deletion within codon 191, a splice acceptor mutation in intron 3, and a 167-bp deletion of part of exon 1 and intron 1. In addition, we have detected a codon 175 mutation in a family previously reported as TP53 negative. To summarize all of the data from the families we have studied in this and our previous report (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994), mutations have been detected in 15 of 21 LFS families (71%) and in 4 of 18 LFL families (22%). These figures are somewhat higher than those previously reported by us and others for the frequency of TP53 mutations in LFS and LFL families. This could reflect our analysis of all 11 exons of TP53, including noncoding regions, as well as the use of direct sequencing rather than other less-sensitive mutation detection methods.

9569035
Two Li-Fraumeni syndrome families with novel germline p53 mutations: loss of the wild-type p53 allele in only 50% of tumours
We describe two Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. Family A was remarkable for two early childhood cases of adrenocortical tumours, family B for a high incidence of many characteristic cancers, including a childhood case of choroid plexus tumour. Using direct sequencing, we analysed exons 5-9 of the p53 gene in constitutional DNA of individuals from both families and found two novel germline mutations in exon 5. In family A, we detected a point substitution in codon 138 (GCC to CCC), which resulted in the replacement of the alanine by a proline residue. Family B harboured a single-base pair deletion in codon 178 (CAC to -AC), resulting in a frameshift and premature chain termination. Three out of six tumours examined from both families, a renal cell carcinoma, a rhabdomyosarcoma and a breast cancer, showed loss of heterozygosity and contained only the mutant p53 allele. The remaining three neoplasms, both adrenocortical tumours and the choroid plexus tumour retained heterozygosity. Immunohistochemistry with anti-p53 antibody confirmed accumulation of p53 protein in tumours with loss of heterozygosity, while the remaining tumours were p53 negative. These results support the view that complete loss of activity of the wild-type p53 need not be the initial event in the formation of all tumours in Li-Fraumeni individuals.

8308926
Germline p53 gene mutations in subsets of glioma patients
Background:
        
      
      Heritable germline mutations of the p53 gene have been described in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, occasionally in nonfamilial malignancies such as multifocal osteosarcoma, in a small subgroup of young patients with two or more primary malignancies, and in patients with sporadic breast carcinoma. We recently reported that multifocal gliomas are frequently associated with other primary malignancies, and we hypothesized that genetic alterations may account for this phenomenon.

22507745
Comparable frequency of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 germline mutations in a multi-ethnic Asian cohort suggests TP53 screening should be offered together with BRCA1/2 screening to early-onset breast cancer patients
Introduction:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations cause an increased risk to early-onset breast cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families and the majority of carriers identified through breast cancer cohorts have LFS or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) features. However, in Asia and in many low resource settings, it is challenging to obtain accurate family history and we, therefore, sought to determine whether the presence of early-onset breast cancer is an appropriate selection criteria for germline TP53 testing.

22923379
Rapid profiling of disease alleles using a tunable reporter of protein misfolding
Many human diseases are caused by genetic mutations that decrease protein stability. Such mutations may not specifically affect an active site, but can alter protein folding, abundance, or localization. Here we describe a high-throughput cell-based stability assay, IDESA (intra-DHFR enzyme stability assay), where stability is coupled to cell proliferation in the model yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The assay requires no prior knowledge of a protein's structure or activity, allowing the assessment of stability of proteins that have unknown or difficult to characterize activities, and we demonstrate use with a range of disease-relevant targets, including human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT), superoxide dismutase (SOD-1), DJ-1, p53, and SMN1. The assay can be carried out on hundreds of disease alleles in parallel or used to identify stabilizing small molecules (pharmacological chaperones) for unstable alleles. As demonstration of the general utility of this assay, we analyze stability of disease alleles of AGT, deficiency of which results in the kidney stone disease, primary hyperoxaluria type I, identifying mutations that specifically affect the protein-active site chemistry.

10589545
Germline mutations of p53 but not p16/CDKN2 or PTEN/MMAC1 tumor suppressor genes predispose to gliomas. The ANOCEF Group. Association des NeuroOncologues d'Expression Française
Constitutional DNA from 44 selected patients suspected of being genetically predisposed to develop astrocytic tumors was analyzed for germline mutations of the p53, p16, and PTEN genes. Six constitutional missense mutations of the p53 gene were identified (13.6%), but no mutations of the p16 and PTEN genes were found, suggesting that (1) germline p53 mutations contribute to a small portion of astrocytic tumors, (2) inherited mutations of the p16 and PTEN gene do not predispose to the development of gliomas, and (3) other genes are involved in glioma predisposition.

32475984
A rapid solubility assay of protein domain misfolding for pathogenicity assessment of rare DNA sequence variants
Purpose:
        
      
      DNA sequencing technology has unmasked a vast number of uncharacterized single-nucleotide variants in disease-associated genes, and efficient methods are needed to determine pathogenicity and enable clinical care.

23469205
Comprehensive analysis of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 germline mutation and tumor characterization: a portrait of early-onset breast cancer in Brazil
Germline mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes have been identified as one of the most important disease-causing issues in young breast cancer patients worldwide. The specific defective biological processes that trigger germline mutation-associated and -negative tumors remain unclear. To delineate an initial portrait of Brazilian early-onset breast cancer, we performed an investigation combining both germline and tumor analysis. Germline screening of the BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2 (c.1100delC) and TP53 genes was performed in 54 unrelated patients <35 y; their tumors were investigated with respect to transcriptional and genomic profiles as well as hormonal receptors and HER2 expression/amplification. Germline mutations were detected in 12 out of 54 patients (22%) [7 in BRCA1 (13%), 4 in BRCA2 (7%) and one in TP53 (2%) gene]. A cancer familial history was present in 31.4% of the unrelated patients, from them 43.7% were carriers for germline mutation (37.5% in BRCA1 and in 6.2% in the BRCA2 genes). Fifty percent of the unrelated patients with hormone receptor-negative tumors carried BRCA1 mutations, percentage increasing to 83% in cases with familial history of cancer. Over-representation of DNA damage-, cellular and cell cycle-related processes was detected in the up-regulated genes of BRCA1/2-associated tumors, whereas cell and embryo development-related processes were over-represented in the up-regulated genes of BRCA1/2-negative tumors, suggesting distinct mechanisms driving the tumorigenesis. An initial portrait of the early-onset breast cancer patients in Brazil was generated pointing out that hormone receptor-negative tumors and positive familial history are two major risk factors for detection of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Additionally, the data revealed molecular factors that potentially trigger the tumor development in young patients.

31278746
Germline mutations and new copy number variants among 40 pediatric cancer patients suspected for genetic predisposition
Cancer predisposition syndromes (CPS) result from germline pathogenic variants, and they are increasingly recognized in the etiology of many pediatric cancers. Herein, we report the genetic/genomic analysis of 40 pediatric patients enrolled from 2016 to 2018. Our diagnostic workflow was successful in 50% of screened cases. Overall, the proportion of CPS in our case series is 10.9% (20/184) of enrolled patients. Interestingly, 12.5% of patients achieved a conclusive diagnosis through the analysis of chromosomal imbalance. Indeed, we observed germline microdeletions/duplications of regions encompassing cancer-related genes in 50% of patients undergoing array-CGH: EIF3H duplication in a patient with infantile desmoplastic astrocytoma and low-grade Glioma; SLFN11 deletion, SOX4 duplication, and PARK2 partial deletion in three neuroblastoma patients; a PTPRD partial deletion in a child diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme. Finally, we identified two cases due to DICER1 germline mutations.

12076704
A novel, de novo germline TP53 mutation in a rare presentation of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome in the maxilla
We undertook the genetic analysis of a classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) family with clustering of primary tumours including two maxillary sarcomas, a rare LFS site of tumour occurrence. Our aim was to investigate the presence of a specific type of TP53 mutation that could be associated with this unusual predilection of site for cancer occurrence. Mutational screening of the coding region of TP53 revealed an A>T transversion in codon 144 of exon 5 (CAG>CTG, Gln>Leu) in the germline of one of the three affected members, with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumour tissue. All other affected members were negative for germline or somatic TP53 mutations. TP53 immunohistochemistry was uninformative. The mutation we report is a de novo constitutional TP53 mutation that has not been previously described in the literature. It could explain the more burdened phenotype of the affected patient (died at 21 months). Alternative mechanisms to explain the overall family phenotype are discussed.

30980208
Multigene panel testing in unselected Israeli breast cancer cases: mutational spectrum and use of BRCA1/2 mutation prediction algorithms
Background:
        
      
      Studies assessing the contribution of non-BRCA1/2 gene mutations to inherited breast cancer (BC) predisposition consistently reported low (up to 4%) yield. The current study aimed at assessing the spectrum of non-BRCA mutations in unselected Israeli BC cases and the utility of BRCAPRO and Penn II models, as tools for prediction of detecting non-BRCA1/2 mutations in Israeli BC patients who tested negative for the predominant Jewish BRCA1/2 mutations.

21305319
Joint effects of germ-line TP53 mutation, MDM2 SNP309, and gender on cancer risk in family studies of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare familial cancer syndrome characterized by early cancer onset, diverse tumor types, and multiple primary tumors. Germ-line TP53 mutations have been identified in most LFS families. A high-frequency single-nucleotide polymorphism, SNP309 (rs2279744), in MDM2 was recently confirmed to be a modifier of cancer risk in several case-series studies: substantially earlier cancer onset was observed in SNP309 G-allele carriers than in wild-type individuals by 7-16 years. However, cancer risk analyses that jointly account for measured hereditary TP53 mutations and MDM2 SNP309 have not been systematically investigated in familial cases. Here, we determined the combined effects of measured TP53 mutations, MDM2 SNP309, and gender and their interactions simultaneously in LFS families. We used the method that is designed for extended pedigrees and structured for age-specific risk models based on Cox proportional hazards regression. We analyzed the cancer incidence in 19 extended pedigrees with germ-line TP53 mutations ascertained through the clinical LFS phenotype. The dataset consisted of 463 individuals with 129 TP53 mutation carriers. Our analyses showed that the TP53 germ-line mutation and its interaction with gender were strongly associated with familial cancer incidence and that the association between MDM2 SNP309 and increased cancer risk was modest. In contrast with several case-series studies, the interaction between MDM2 SNP309 and TP53 mutation was not statistically significant in our LFS family cohort. Our results showed that SNP309 G-alleles were associated with accelerated tumor formation in both carriers and non-carriers of germ-line TP53 mutations.

20198344
Heterozygous TP53stop146/R72P fibroblasts from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome patient with impaired response to DNA damage
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome, characterized by a wide spectrum of neoplasms, occurring in children and young adults. The identification of germline TP53 mutations in LFS has given rise to a number of in vitro studies using cultures of cancer cells and non-tumoral fibroblasts presenting germline TP53 mutations. In the present study, we performed a detailed documentation of the pedigree of an LFS family with a comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations. We sequenced the TP53 gene and verified that the proband carries a germline nonsense mutation in codon 146 in one allele, the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism in the second, and other intronic polymorphisms in the TP53 gene. In order to investigate the disruption of the p53 function in a patient presenting this mutation and the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism who had so far suffered five malignant tumors and a benign meningioma, we tested her fibroblasts in response to DNA damage by evaluating the proliferation rate, apoptosis, and disruption of the TP53 pathway. The proband's heterozygous fibroblasts were not as efficient as control fibroblasts or those of her mother, who carried only the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism, in causing cell arrest and cell death after DNA damage, which was correlated with diminished TP21 protein levels.

24382691
Anaplastic rhabdomyosarcoma in TP53 germline mutation carriers
Background:
        
      
      Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) represents a diverse category of myogenic malignancies with marked differences in molecular alterations and histology. This study examines the question if RMS predisposition due to germline TP53 mutations correlates with certain RMS histologies.

32854451
Detection of Germline Mutations in a Cohort of 139 Patients with Bilateral Breast Cancer by Multi-Gene Panel Testing: Impact of Pathogenic Variants in Other Genes beyond BRCA1/2
Patients with unilateral breast cancer (UBC) have an increased risk of developing bilateral breast cancer (BBC). The annual risk of contralateral BC is about 0.5%, but increases by up to 3% in BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant (PV) carriers. Our study was aimed to evaluate whether all BBC patients should be offered multi-gene panel testing, regardless their cancer family history and age at diagnosis. We retrospectively collected all clinical information of 139 BBC patients genetically tested for germline PVs in different cancer susceptibility genes by NGS-based multi-gene panel testing. Our investigation revealed that 52 (37.4%) out of 139 BBC patients harbored germline PVs in high- and intermediate-penetrance breast cancer (BC) susceptibility genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN, PALB2, CHEK2, ATM, RAD51C. Nineteen out of 53 positively tested patients harbored a PV in a known BC susceptibility gene (no-BRCA). Interestingly, in the absence of an analysis performed via multi-gene panel, a significant proportion (14.4%) of PVs would have been lost. Therefore, offering a NGS-based multi-gene panel testing to all BBC patients may significantly increase the detection rates of germline PVs in other cancer susceptibility genes beyond BRCA1/2, avoiding underestimation of the number of individuals affected by a hereditary tumor syndrome.

1686725
TP53 gene mutations and 17p deletions in human astrocytomas
Astrocytomas, including the most malignant form, glioblastoma multiforme, are the most frequent and deadly primary tumors of the human nervous system. Recent molecular genetic analyses of astrocytomas have demonstrated frequent chromosome 17 deletions involving the telomeric region of the short arm (17p12-pter). This region contains a candidate tumor suppressor gene, TP53, which has recently been implicated in the etiology of a broad array of human cancers. To study the possible role of TP53 in astrocytoma development, 24 randomly chosen human astrocytic tumors were examined for genomic TP53 sequence aberrations using primer-directed DNA amplification in conjunction with direct sequencing. Five of the 11 grade III astrocytomas (glioblastoma multiforme), but only one of seven grade II astrocytomas (anaplastic astrocytoma) and none of either the grade I astrocytomas or oligodendrogliomas demonstrated distinct point mutations involving the TP53 gene. These data suggest that TP53 mutations may play a role in astrocytoma development and are predominantly associated with higher grade tumors.

11479205
p53, CHK2, and CHK1 genes in Finnish families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: further evidence of CHK2 in inherited cancer predisposition
Germ-line mutations in the p53 gene predispose individuals to Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). The cell cycle checkpoint kinases CHK1 and CHK2 act upstream of p53 in DNA damage responses, and recently rare germ-line mutations in CHK2 were reported in LFS families. We have analyzed CHK1, CHK2, and p53 genes for mutations in 44 Finnish families with LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, or families phenotypically suggestive of LFS with conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis. Five different disease-causing mutations were observed in 7 families (7 of 44 families; 15.9%): 4 in the p53 gene (5 of 44 families; 11.4%) and 1 in the CHK2 gene (2 of 44 families; 4.5%). Interestingly, the other CHK2-mutation carrier also has a mutation in the MSH6 gene. The cancer phenotype in the CHK2-families was not characteristic of LFS, and may indicate variable phenotypic expression in the rare families with CHK2 mutations. No mutations in the CHK1 gene were identified. Additional work is necessary to completely unravel the molecular background of LFS.

7966399
High frequency of germline p53 mutations in childhood adrenocortical cancer
Background:
        
      
      Adrenocortical carcinoma (ADCC) is a rare childhood cancer, affecting three of 1 million children younger than 16 years old in the United States. ADCC may be found in association with the Li-Fraumeni and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes. Children with ADCC are also at substantially increased risk of second primary cancers. Because of these associations, it is believed that the genetic basis for ADCC is stronger than for most childhood malignancies. Germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with cancer predisposition in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome as well as in individuals with sporadically occurring component tumors of the syndrome.

28664506
Prevalence and spectrum of germline rare variants in BRCA1/2 and PALB2 among breast cancer cases in Sarawak, Malaysia
Purpose:
        
      
      To characterize the spectrum of germline mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2, and PALB2 in population-based unselected breast cancer cases in an Asian population.

7664239
Constitutional p53 mutations associated with brain tumors in young adults
Identification of patients at risk for developing brain tumors is important for the development of preventative strategies. Because individuals with germline p53 mutations may be at increased risk, we examined DNA from brain tumor-derived cell lines and malignant and normal nervous system tissue for p53 gene mutations using the single strand conformation polymorphism assay and direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction-amplified DNA. We found mutations in the p53 gene in eight of 22 adult glioma tissue specimens and germline mutations in two of these eight patients. In contrast, mutation of the p53 gene was not detectable in either 16 glial tumors occurring in children, glial tumor tissue from three unrelated glioblastoma multiforme patients with a familial history of cancer, or in benign meningiomas. One constitutional p53 mutation was a G to T transversion at codon 154, and the second was a C to T transition at codon 256. Both patients with germline mutations developed glioblastoma multiforme before the age of 31, although the median age for glioma patients is above 50. These findings suggest that p53 germline mutations may identify a subset of young adults predisposed to the development of high-grade astrocytic tumors.

21488255
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: TP53. Disease: Li-Fraumeni syndrome


27621308
Acute myeloid leukemia with TP53 germ line mutations


26822237
Diagnostic Yield of Clinical Tumor and Germline Whole-Exome Sequencing for Children With Solid Tumors
Importance:
        
      
      Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has the potential to reveal tumor and germline mutations of clinical relevance, but the diagnostic yield for pediatric patients with solid tumors is unknown.

23981578
Two co-existing germline mutations P53 V157D and PMS2 R20Q promote tumorigenesis in a familial cancer syndrome
Germline mutations are responsible for familial cancer syndromes which account for approximately 5-10% of all types of cancers. These mutations mainly occur at tumor suppressor genes or genome stability genes, such as DNA repair genes. Here we have identified a cancer predisposition family, in which eight members were inflicted with a wide spectrum of cancer including one diagnosed with lung cancer at 22years old. Sequencing analysis of tumor samples as well as histologically normal specimens identified two germline mutations co-existing in the familial cancer syndrome, the mutation of tumor suppressor gene P53 V157D and mismatch repair gene PMS2 R20Q. We further demonstrate that P53 V157D and/or PMS2 R20Q mutant promotes lung cancer cell proliferation. These two mutants are capable of promoting colony formation in soft agar as well as tumor formation in transgenic drosophila system. Collectively, these data have uncovered the important role of co-existing germline P53 and PMS2 mutations in the familial cancer syndrome development.

29785153
Prevalence of deleterious mutations among patients with breast cancer referred for multigene panel testing in a Romanian population
Aim:
        
      
      Multigene panel testing for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) using next generation sequencing is becoming more common in medical care.We report our experience regarding deleterious mutations of high and moderate-risk breast cancer genes (BRCA1/2, TP53, STK11, CDH1, PTEN, PALB2, CHEK2, ATM), as well as more recently identified cancer genes, many of which have increased risk but less well-defined penetrance.

22170717
TP53 germline mutations in adult patients with adrenocortical carcinoma
Context:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome associated with germline mutations in TP53. According to the Chompret criteria for LFS, any patient with adrenocortical cancer (ACC), irrespective of age and family history, is at high risk for a TP53 germline mutation. However, whereas such mutations have been detected with high frequency in childhood ACC, a large cohort of adult patients with ACC has never been investigated for TP53 germline mutations.

10864200
P53 germline mutations in childhood cancers and cancer risk for carrier individuals
The family history of cancer in children treated for a solid malignant tumour in the Paediatric Oncology Department at Institute Gustave-Roussy, has been investigated. In order to determine the role of germline p53 mutations in genetic predisposition to childhood cancer, germline p53 mutations were sought in individuals with at least one relative (first- or second-degree relative or first cousin) affected by any cancer before 46 years of age, or affected by multiple cancers. Screening for germline p53 mutation was possible in 268 index cases among individuals fulfilling selection criteria. Seventeen (6.3%) mutations were identified, of which 13 were inherited and four were de novo. Using maximum likelihood methods that incorporate retrospective family data and correct for ascertainment bias, the lifetime risk of cancer for mutation carriers was estimated to be 73% for males and nearly 100% for females with a high risk of breast cancer accounting for the difference. The risk of cancer associated with such mutations is very high and no evidence of low penetrance mutation was found. These mutations are frequently inherited but de novo mutations are not rare.

21339461
Multiple primary cutaneous melanomas in Li-Fraumeni syndrome


10486318
Are there low-penetrance TP53 Alleles? evidence from childhood adrenocortical tumors
We have analyzed a panel of 14 cases of childhood adrenocortical tumors unselected for family history and have identified germline TP53 mutations in >80%, making this the highest known incidence of a germline mutation in a tumor-suppressor gene in any cancer. The spectrum of germline TP53 mutations detected is remarkably limited. Analysis of tumor tissue for loss of constitutional heterozygosity, with respect to the germline mutant allele and the occurrence of other somatic TP53 mutations, indicates complex sequences of genetic events in a number of tumors. None of the families had cancer histories that conformed to the criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, but, in some families, we were able to demonstrate that the mutation had been inherited. In these families there were gene carriers unaffected in their 40s and 50s, and there were others with relatively late-onset cancers. These data provide evidence that certain TP53 alleles confer relatively low penetrance for predisposition to the development of cancer, and they imply that deleterious TP53 mutations may be more frequent in the population than has been estimated previously. Our findings have considerable implications for the clinical management of children with andrenocortical tumors and their parents, in terms of both genetic testing and the early detection and treatment of tumors.

28843361
Germline Mutations in DNA Repair Genes in Lung Adenocarcinoma
Introduction:
        
      
      Although lung cancer is generally thought to be environmentally provoked, anecdotal familial clustering has been reported, suggesting that there may be genetic susceptibility factors. We systematically tested whether germline mutations in eight candidate genes may be risk factors for lung adenocarcinoma.

31159747
Analysis of hereditary cancer syndromes by using a panel of genes: novel and multiple pathogenic mutations
Background:
        
      
      Hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes are responsible for approximately 5-10% of all diagnosed cancer cases. In the past, single-gene analysis of specific high risk genes was used for the determination of the genetic cause of cancer heritability in certain families. The application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has facilitated multigene panel analysis and is widely used in clinical practice, for the identification of individuals with cancer predisposing gene variants. The purpose of this study was to investigate the extent and nature of variants in genes implicated in hereditary cancer predisposition in individuals referred for testing in our laboratory.

10207667
Molecular assessment of clonality leads to the identification of a new germ line TP53 mutation associated with malignant cystosarcoma phyllodes and soft tissue sarcoma
Cystosarcoma phyllodes (CSP) is a rare breast neoplasm composed of stromal and epithelial elements. It usually runs a benign course but it may metastasize. In a 31-year-old patient with recurring CSP, a mesenchymal tumor in the leg developed. The question arose whether the latter tumor could be a metastasis from the CSP, which would have major treatment consequences. The problem was addressed using molecular methods, i.e., comparison of the pattern of polymorphic repeat markers on chromosome 17p as well as single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing of exons 5 to 8 of the TP53 gene in both tumor and normal tissue. An identical pattern of loss of heterozygosity in both breast tumors was demonstrated, but a different pattern was shown in the tumor in the leg. This led to the conclusion that the latter tumor had to be a new primary tumor. A mutation in codon 162 of the TP53 gene was found in the tumor tissue as well as in the normal tissue of this patient. This germ line mutation leads to the replacement of isoleucine by asparagine and most likely has functional consequences. In all four examined tumors of this patient, the normal TP53 allele was lost. This is strong evidence that this germ line TP53 mutation causes the genesis of these two rare primary mesenchymal tumors in this young patient. The current study exemplifies the power of molecular diagnostic methods in investigating the specific clinical problem of clonal relation between two separate tumors. The germ line mutation found in codon 162 of the TP53 gene and the association with cystosarcoma phyllodes have not been described previously.

25374282
Simultaneous Adrenocortical Carcinoma and Neuroblastoma in an Infant With a Novel Germline p53 Mutation
We present an infant with 2 simultaneous, but histologically distinct tumors with a novel germline p53 mutation. The child was found to have a paraspinal neuroblastoma, a concurrent adrenal cortical carcinoma, and an I162F p53 gene mutation. We review the associations of germline p53 mutations (or Li-Fraumeni syndrome) with both tumor types and the current research in similar germline p53 mutations. Finally, we discuss the multiple ways in which our patient is unique including the paucity of cases with simultaneous but histologically unrelated tumors and the fact that our patient is the first reported case of an I162F germline p53 mutation.

8164043
Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma
Purpose:
        
      
      We investigated the possibility that a significant proportion of children with osteosarcoma harbor germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and, therefore, this subgroup of pediatric cancer patients should be considered for large-scale predictive testing.

26911350
Detection of high frequency of mutations in a breast and/or ovarian cancer cohort: implications of embracing a multi-gene panel in molecular diagnosis in India
Breast and/or ovarian cancer (BOC) are among the most frequently diagnosed forms of hereditary cancers and leading cause of death in India. This emphasizes on the need for a cost-effective method for early detection of these cancers. We sequenced 141 unrelated patients and families with BOC using the TruSight Cancer panel, which includes 13 genes strongly associated with risk of inherited BOC. Multi-gene sequencing was done on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Genetic variations were identified using the Strand NGS software and interpreted using the StrandOmics platform. We were able to detect pathogenic mutations in 51 (36.2%) cases, out of which 19 were novel mutations. When we considered familial breast cancer cases only, the detection rate increased to 52%. When cases were stratified based on age of diagnosis into three categories, ⩽40 years, 40-50 years and >50 years, the detection rates were higher in the first two categories (44.4% and 53.4%, respectively) as compared with the third category, in which it was 26.9%. Our study suggests that next-generation sequencing-based multi-gene panels increase the sensitivity of mutation detection and help in identifying patients with a high risk of developing cancer as compared with sequential tests of individual genes.

30076369
Identification and characterization of TP53 gene Allele Dropout in Li-Fraumeni syndrome and Oral cancer cohorts
Allele Drop out (ADO) arising from non-amplification of one allele may produce false negative result and impact clinical management. In cancer, germline and somatic genetic analysis is being increasingly used but the prevalence, nature and implications of ADO has not been studied in any cohort. In a cohort of 290 Li Fraumeni/Li Fraumeni Like Syndrome cases undergoing TP53 genetic testing, of the 69 pathogenic mutations identified so far, 5 were initially missed and 4 were misgenotyped as homozygous mutation due to germline ADO. Of the 9 germline ADOs, 8 were sequence dependent, arising from a polymorphism (rs12951053) in the primer annealing region of exon 7. Of 35 somatic TP53 variants identified by exome sequencing in 50 oral cancer tissues registered under International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), as a result of ADO, 4 were not detectable and 6 were not called as variant on Sanger Sequencing due to low peak height. High prevalence of germline and somatic ADO in the most frequently mutated cancer gene TP53, highlights the need for systematic evaluation of ADO prevalence and causes in clinically important cancer genes. False negative result for high penetrance germline mutations or actionable somatic mutations in oncogenes could have major clinical implications.

33138793
Mutation screening of germline TP53 mutations in high-risk Chinese breast cancer patients
Background:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a severe and rare hereditary cancer syndrome. Despite the rarity of germline TP53 mutations, the clinical implication for mutation carriers and their families is significant. The risk management of TP53 germline mutation carriers is more stringent than BRCA carriers, and radiotherapy should be avoided when possible.

32187703
Cutaneous pleomorphic fibromas arising in patients with germline TP53 mutations
Pleomorphic fibromas are rare benign cutaneous neoplasms associated with deletion/loss of chromosomes 13q and 17p, where RB1 and TP53 are located, respectively. Herein, we report five cases of pleomorphic fibroma arising in patients with germline TP53 mutations, suggesting a potential link with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. All three patients were female and young (mean age 27) with a strong personal and/or family oncologic history and confirmed pathogenic germline TP53 mutations. In two patients, multiple pleomorphic fibromas were diagnosed. Clinically, the lesions arose at various cutaneous sites and were small (≤2 cm) and raised (4/5). Histopathologically, the tumors were paucicellular, composed of atypical spindled to stellate cells with hyperchromatic and variably pleomorphic nuclei. Mitotic activity was exceedingly low, although rare atypical mitotic figures were seen in one case. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for p16 (3/3) and showed loss of Rb expression (5/5). All cases showed aberrant p53 expression (overexpression in 4, complete loss in 1). The tumors have followed a benign clinical course with no evidence of progression or recurrence. In conclusion, the development of multiple pleomorphic fibromas in a young patient may be a clue to an underlying genetic cancer syndrome involving TP53.

30607672
TP53 germline mutation testing in early-onset breast cancer: findings from a nationwide cohort
Early-onset breast cancer may be due to Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS). Current national and international guidelines recommend that TP53 genetic testing should be considered for women with breast cancer diagnosed before the age of 31 years. However, large studies investigating TP53 mutation prevalence in this population are scarce. We collected nationwide laboratory records for all young breast cancer patients tested for TP53 mutations in the Netherlands. Between 2005 and 2016, 370 women diagnosed with breast cancer younger than 30 years of age were tested for TP53 germline mutations, and eight (2.2%) were found to carry a (likely) pathogenic TP53 sequence variant. Among BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation negative women without a family history suggestive of LFS or a personal history of multiple LFS-related tumours, the TP53 mutation frequency was < 1% (2/233). Taking into consideration that TP53 mutation prevalence was comparable or even higher in some studies selecting patients with breast cancer onset at older ages or HER2-positive breast cancers, raises the question of whether a very early age of onset is an appropriate single TP53 genetic testing criterion.

22653678
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations and history of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in families with childhood adrenocortical tumors, choroid plexus tumors, and rhabdomyosarcoma: a population-based survey
Purpose:
        
      
      Whether childhood adrenocortical tumors (ACTs), choroid plexus tumors (CPTs), and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) are early manifestation of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is uncertain. In this study, we evaluated the frequency of germline TP53 mutations and family history in a population-based series of patients.

15951970
The TP53 mutational spectrum and frequency of CHEK2*1100delC in Li-Fraumeni-like kindreds
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a wide spectrum of neoplasms occurring at young age. Germline mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene have been identified in approximately 71 of LFS patients and 22 of Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) patients. Mutations within the cell cycle checkpoint gene CHEK2 have also been reported in some patients with LFS, LFL, and phenotypically suggestive of LFS (PS-LFS) not carrying a TP53 mutation. In this study, we show that 7 of the 23 patients with LFS/LFL tested positive for deleterious mutations in p53. Fifteen of the remaining sixteen were not found to carry the CHEK2* 1100delCmutation. These results indicate that CHEK2*1100delC is not a common cause of LFS, LFL, or PS-LFS in North American kindreds not carrying a TP53 mutation. Of note, two patients were found to carry p53* R72P, which is of unknown clinical significance. Lack of segregation of this allele in one of these kindreds provides strong evidence that the R72P allele is not disease-causing. While mutations in p53 account for a proportion of patients with LFS/LFL, future studies are needed to determine if other genes are responsible for LFS/LFL families not carrying germline p53 mutations.

29770616
Prevalence of germline BRCA mutations among women with carcinoma of the peritoneum or fallopian tube
Objective:
        
      
      The aim of the present study was to assess the frequency of germline mutations in patients with peritoneal carcinoma (PC) or the fallopian tube carcinoma (FTC), using a multi-gene panel.

16494995
The TP53 mutation, R337H, is associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes in Brazilian families
A TP53 germline mutation, R337H, has been previously described in children from southern Brazil with adrenocortical tumours but no documented familial history of other cancers. Here, we have screened for TP53 mutation 45 Brazilian unrelated individuals with family histories fulfilling the clinical definitions of Li-Fraumeni (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. Mutations were found in 13 patients (28.9%), including six (46.1%) R337H mutations, and four novel germline mutations (V173M, V197M, G244D and IVS6+1G>T). Families with the R337H mutation presented a wide spectrum of tumours, including breast cancers (30.4%), brain cancers (10.7%), soft tissue sarcomas (10.7%) and adrenocortical carcinomas (8.9%). Testing of 53 Brazilian subjects with no cancer history showed that R337H was not a common polymorphism in that population. Moreover, loss of heterozygocity with retention of the R337H allele was observed in a breast adenocarcinoma, supporting a role for this mutation in breast tumorigenesis. These results show that the TP53 R337H germline mutation predisposes to a larger spectrum of tumours, similar to the one reported for other TP53 mutations.

11370630
Detection of 11 germline inactivating TP53 mutations and absence of TP63 and HCHK2 mutations in 17 French families with Li-Fraumeni or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome


15607981
Gain of function of a p53 hot spot mutation in a mouse model of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome carry inherited mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene and are predisposed to tumor development. To examine the mechanistic nature of these p53 missense mutations, we generated mice harboring a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 515 of p53 (p53+/515A) corresponding to the p53R175H hot spot mutation in human cancers. Although p53+/515A mice display a similar tumor spectrum and survival curve as p53+/- mice, tumors from p53+/515A mice metastasized with high frequency. Correspondingly, the embryonic fibroblasts from the p53515A/515A mutant mice displayed enhanced cell proliferation, DNA synthesis, and transformation potential. The disruption of p63 and p73 in p53-/- cells increased transformation capacity and reinitiated DNA synthesis to levels observed in p53515A/515A cells. Additionally, p63 and p73 were functionally inactivated in p53515A cells. These results provide in vivo validation for the gain-of-function properties of certain p53 missense mutations and suggest a mechanistic basis for these phenotypes.

15607980
Mutant p53 gain of function in two mouse models of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The p53 tumor suppressor gene is commonly altered in human tumors, predominantly through missense mutations that result in accumulation of mutant p53 protein. These mutations may confer dominant-negative or gain-of-function properties to p53. To ascertain the physiological effects of p53 point mutation, the structural mutant p53R172H and the contact mutant p53R270H (codons 175 and 273 in humans) were engineered into the endogenous p53 locus in mice. p53R270H/+ and p53R172H/+ mice are models of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome; they developed allele-specific tumor spectra distinct from p53+/- mice. In addition, p53R270H/- and p53R172H/- mice developed novel tumors compared to p53-/- mice, including a variety of carcinomas and more frequent endothelial tumors. Dominant effects that varied by allele and function were observed in primary cells derived from p53R270H/+ and p53R172H/+ mice. These results demonstrate that point mutant p53 alleles expressed under physiological control have enhanced oncogenic potential beyond the simple loss of p53 function.

16707427
Identification of a novel germ line variant hotspot mutant p53-R175L in pediatric adrenal cortical carcinoma
Hotspot mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene result in the disruption of DNA contact points or alter the overall structure of the protein to prevent DNA binding. When inherited, hotspot mutants are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer predisposition. One of the most common hotspot mutations occurs at codon 175, resulting in an arginine to histidine substitution. We have identified a novel germ line variant of the 175 mutant (Arg to Leu; R175L) in a pediatric patient who developed adrenal cortical carcinoma. Surprisingly, the family is not tumor prone or associated with LFS. In vitro, the R175L mutant displayed an attenuated tumor suppressor activity in the regulation of transcription, colony formation, and apoptosis when compared with wild-type p53 and the R175H mutant. These findings suggest that p53-R175L retains sufficient activity to suppress LFS, but not adrenal cortical carcinoma. Therefore, not all hotspot mutants are functionally equivalent and the biochemical nature of the mutant may significantly influence clinical outcome. The implications of these results for genetic counseling are discussed.

26659639
Multilocus Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome: A Case Series and Review
Mendelian causes of inherited cancer susceptibility are mostly rare and characterized by variable expression and incomplete penetrance. Phenotypic variability may result from a range of causes including locus heterogeneity, allelic heterogeneity, genetic and environmental modifier effects, or chance. Another potential cause is the presence of 2 or more inherited cancer predisposition alleles in the same individual. Although the frequency of such occurrences might be predicted to be low, such cases have probably been underascertained because standard clinical practice has been to test candidate inherited cancer genes sequentially until a pathogenic mutation is detected. However, recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies now provide the opportunity to perform simultaneous parallel testing of large numbers of inherited cancer genes. Herein we provide examples of patients who harbor pathogenic mutations in multiple inherited cancer genes and review previously published examples to illustrate the complex genotype-phenotype relationships in these cases. We suggest that clinicians should proactively consider the likelihood of this phenomenon (referred to herein as multilocus inherited neoplasia alleles syndrome [MINAS]) in patients with unusual inherited cancer syndrome phenotypes. To facilitate the clinical management of novel cases of MINAS, we have established a database to collect information on what is likely to be an increasingly recognized cohort of such individuals.

27622479
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome is characterized clinically by the appearance of tumors in multiple organs generally at an early age. This hereditary condition is caused by germinal mutations in the TP53 gene, which codifies for the tumoural suppressor gene p53. We present the case of a patient aged 31 with clinical and molecular diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome who presented two synchronous tumors: a leiomyosarcoma on the forearm and a phyllodes breast tumour. She had a family history of cancer, including a son diagnosed with a cortical adrenal carcinoma when he was three years old, who died at five from the disease. Furthermore, her maternal grandmother and great-grandmother died of stomach cancer at 56 and 60 years old, respectively, while her other great-grandmother and a great aunt presented with breast cancer at the ages of 60 and 40, respectively. After genetic counseling, complete sequencing and analysis of duplications and deletions in the TP53 gene were ordered prior to diagnosis. The molecular analysis of a DNA sample taken from peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed the germinal mutation c.527G>T (p.Cys176Phe) on exon 5 of the TP53 gene, a deleterious mutation described previously in tumoural tissues. To our knowledge, this is the first published case in Colombia of Li-Fraumeni syndrome with confirmed molecular diagnosis. The diagnosis and management of Li-Fraumeni syndrome should be performed by a multidisciplinary team, and genetic counselling should be offered to patients and their relatives.

27153395
Evaluation of ACMG-Guideline-Based Variant Classification of Cancer Susceptibility and Non-Cancer-Associated Genes in Families Affected by Breast Cancer
Sequencing tests assaying panels of genes or whole exomes are widely available for cancer risk evaluation. However, methods for classification of variants resulting from this testing are not well studied. We evaluated the ability of a variant-classification methodology based on American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines to define the rate of mutations and variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in 180 medically relevant genes, including all ACMG-designated reportable cancer and non-cancer-associated genes, in individuals who met guidelines for hereditary cancer risk evaluation. We performed whole-exome sequencing in 404 individuals in 253 families and classified 1,640 variants. Potentially clinically actionable (likely pathogenic [LP] or pathogenic [P]) versus nonactionable (VUS, likely benign, or benign) calls were 95% concordant with locus-specific databases and Clinvar. LP or P mutations were identified in 12 of 25 breast cancer susceptibility genes in 26 families without identified BRCA1/2 mutations (11%). Evaluation of 84 additional genes associated with autosomal-dominant cancer susceptibility identified LP or P mutations in only two additional families (0.8%). However, individuals from 10 of 253 families (3.9%) had incidental LP or P mutations in 32 non-cancer-associated genes, and 9% of individuals were monoallelic carriers of a rare LP or P mutation in 39 genes associated with autosomal-recessive cancer susceptibility. Furthermore, 95% of individuals had at least one VUS. In summary, these data support the clinical utility of ACMG variant-classification guidelines. Additionally, evaluation of extended panels of cancer-associated genes in breast/ovarian cancer families leads to only an incremental clinical benefit but substantially increases the complexity of the results.

29324801
Clinical characteristics and registry-validated extended pedigrees of germline TP53 mutation carriers in Denmark
Introduction:
        
      
      TP53 mutation carrier (Li-Fraumeni Syndrome, LFS) cohort studies often suffer from lack of extensive pedigree exploration.

20421238
Novel germ line mutation p53-P177R in adult adrenocortical carcinoma producing neuron-specific enolase as a possible marker
Adrenocortical cancer (ACC) is a rare and aggressive endocrine tumor. The patient presented with a large retroperitoneum tumor and lung metastases. Removal of the adrenocortical tumor with part of the transverse colon and tail of the pancreas, spleen and kidney was successfully performed following chemotherapy. Levels of serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were found to be markedly high before surgery and may be clinically useful markers for monitoring tumor status during management. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the cancer cells were positive for NSE and overexpression of p53. We identified a novel germ line variant of the 177 mutant (Pro to Arg; P177R) of p53 by genomic sequencing. The genetic and biochemical data presented in this case confirm the importance of screening for p53 status in ACC with inherited cancer syndrome.

26787237
Incidental germline variants in 1000 advanced cancers on a prospective somatic genomic profiling protocol
Background:
        
      
      Next-generation sequencing in cancer research may reveal germline variants of clinical significance. We report patient preferences for return of results and the prevalence of incidental pathogenic germline variants (PGVs).

27501770
Biochemical and imaging surveillance in germline TP53 mutation carriers with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 11 year follow-up of a prospective observational study
Background:
        
      
      Carriers of a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have a substantial lifetime risk of developing cancer. In 2011, we did a prospective observational study of members of families who chose to either undergo a comprehensive surveillance protocol for individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome or not. We sought to update our assessment of and modify the surveillance protocol, so in this study we report both longer follow-up of these patients and additional patients who underwent surveillance, as well as update the originally presented surveillance protocol.

21345075
Multiple malignancies in a child with de novo TP53 mutation
The authors present the case of an 8.5-year-old boy diagnosed with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the infratemporal fossa at 21 months old. Five years later he developed an osteosarcoma of the tibia, for which he was treated with standard chemotherapy and resection. Soon after completing this treatment, ptosis of the right eye developed. A mass in the cavernous sinus was found, interpreted as an osteogenic metastatsis, although a third primary tumor could not be ruled out. Molecular genetic investigation revealed a de novo germline TP53 mutation, and heralded an aggressive clinical progression of multiple malignancies in a child.

26094658
Detection of novel germline mutations for breast cancer in non-BRCA1/2 families
The identification of the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 enhanced clinicians' ability to select high-risk individuals for aggressive surveillance and prevention, and led to the development of targeted therapies. However, BRCA1/2 mutations account for only 25% of familial breast cancer cases. To systematically identify rare, probably pathogenic variants in familial cases of breast cancer without BRCA1/2 mutations, we developed a list of 312 genes, and performed targeted DNA enrichment coupled to multiplex next-generation sequencing on 104 'BRCAx' patients and 101 geographically matched controls in Ireland. As expected, this strategy allowed us to identify mutations in several well-known high-susceptibility and moderate-susceptibility genes, including ATM (~ 5%), RAD50 (~ 3%), CHEK2 (~ 2%), TP53 (~ 1%), PALB2 (~ 1%), and MRE11A (~ 1%). However, we also identified novel pathogenic variants in 30 other genes, which, when taken together, potentially explain the etiology of the missing heritability in up to 35% of BRCAx patients. These included novel potential pathogenic mutations in MAP3K1, CASP8, RAD51B, ZNF217, CDKN2B-AS1, and ERBB2, including a splice site mutation, which we predict would generate a constitutively active HER2 protein. Taken together, this work extends our understanding of the genetics of familial breast cancer, and supports the need to implement hereditary multigene panel testing to more appropriately orientate clinical management.

33128190
Prevalence of germline variants in consensus moderate-to-high-risk predisposition genes to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2-negative Brazilian patients
Purpose:
        
      
      This study aimed to identify and classify genetic variants in consensus moderate-to-high-risk predisposition genes associated with Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC), in BRCA1/2-negative patients from Brazil.

19556618
High frequency of de novo mutations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in the TP53 gene. The frequency of germline de novo TP53 mutations is largely unknown; few unequivocal de novo mutations have been reported.

16633321
[Germline tp53 neomutation in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and pancreatic adenocarcinoma]


12509279
A novel p53 mutant retained functional activity in lung carcinomas
The gene p53 is a critical tumor suppressor that can respond to multiple signals of cellular gatekeepers for growth and division. The mdm2 gene is one of the downstream target genes for transcriptional activation by the product of p53 tumor suppressor gene. Transactivation of mdm2 gene is represented by the presence of a functional P53 protein. To understand the biological function of mutant p53 in tumorigenesis, we constructed a number of p53 mutants by site-directed mutagenesis (H179Y, L194R, S240R, R249S, A276D, E286Q), followed by characterization of each P53 mutant's ability to transactivate mdm2, bax and p21waf. The transactivation properties of p53 mutants were compared by co-transfection with pGL-3-mdm2, pGL-3-bax and pGL-3-p21waf into the P53 null cell line H1299 derived from a non-small cell lung carcinoma. Among them mt p53 S240R and E286Q were shown to have enhanced transactivating activity of pGL3-mdm2, at about 43.2 and 28.2% of the wt p53 vector, respectively, while the remaining four had nearly the same level of activity as the negative control did. Furthermore, data indicated that mt p53 S240R had as high an ability to suppress the growth of the p53 null cell line H1299 as wild type p53. Therefore, mutant p53 alone is an insufficient indicator of poor prognosis. Instead, functional p53 may affect lung cancer prognosis.

17530187
The over-expression of p53 H179Y residue mutation causes the increase of cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression in HELF cells
Down-regulation of p53 expression has been found in a broad range of human cancers and cell proliferation disorders, indicating that p53 plays a key role in cell cycle regulation and tumor suppression. In our current study, we transfected human embryonic lung fibroblast (HELF) cells with pcDNA3-wild-type p53 (pcDNA3-wtp53) plasmid, or pcDNA3-H179Y-mutated p53 (pcDNA3-mtp53) plasmid that mimics the mutation found in some human lung tumors, and further studied the role of p53 in the regulation of cell proliferation. Over expression of wild-type p53 caused cell cycle arrest at G1 phase with reduced cell size, decreased expression of cyclin D3, cyclin E, Cdk2 and Cdk4, and increased expression of p21. In contrast, over expression of H179Y-mutant p53 promoted G1 to S phase transition with enlarged cell size and increased cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression in HELF cells. These results indicate that mutation at the p53 H179Y residue up-regulates cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression, and promotes HELF cell proliferation.

8118819
Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families
The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.

1581912
Inherited p53 gene mutations in breast cancer
Recent evidence has implicated germ-line mutations of the p53 gene as the cause of cancer susceptibility in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, associated with the development of breast cancer and other neoplasms. Furthermore, somatic mutations of the p53 gene have been detected in a high percentage of non-familial breast cancers. We therefore sought to identify potential carriers of p53 gene mutations in a cohort of patients with early onset breast cancer. We examined 126 consecutive patients who developed breast cancer at or before the age of 40 for mutations of p53 within conserved regions of the gene. One patient with an inherited germ-line mutation of the p53 gene was identified but the functional significance of this mutation was not clear. It thus appears that only a small percentage of patients with breast cancer under the age of 40 carry germ-line mutations of the p53 gene, an observation which has implications for potential screening and risk assessment in such patients.

1591732
Screening for germ line TP53 mutations in breast cancer patients
The constant denaturant gel electrophoresis technique was used to screen for TP53 germ line mutations in 237 women with breast carcinoma (167 unselected patients, 30 patients with at least one first-degree relative with breast cancer, and 40 women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 35). A germ line mutation at codon 181 was noted in one of the unselected patients and a codon 245 mutation in one of the early-onset patients. Both had a family history of breast cancer and other malignancies suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The codon 245 mutation was also present in this patient's affected mother.

21059199
Radio-induced malignancies after breast cancer postoperative radiotherapy in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      There are no specific recommendations for the management of breast cancer patients with germ-line p53 mutations, an exceptional genetic condition, particularly regarding postoperative radiotherapy. Preclinical data suggested that p53 mutations conferred enhanced radiosensitivity in vitro and in vivo and the few clinical observations showed that Li-Fraumeni families were at a higher risk of secondary radio-induced malignancies.

15925506
Identification of five new families strengthens the link between childhood choroid plexus carcinoma and germline TP53 mutations
We present five families of paediatric patients suffering from choroid plexus carcinoma in which we found germline TP53 mutations. Only one of the families conformed to the criteria of Li-Fraumeni syndrome and only three (including the Li-Fraumeni syndrome family) met the Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. In the remaining two families no family history of cancer was identified and/or the parents of the patient were shown not to carry the mutation. Our results give further support to the notion that the occurrence of this rare paediatric tumour, especially in combination with a positive family history of cancer, but possibly also without any family history, may be an indicator of a germline TP53 mutation. The identification of this genetic defect has important consequences for cancer prevention and treatment in affected families.

29360161
Germline mutation prevalence in individuals with pancreatic cancer and a history of previous malignancy
Background:
        
      
      Approximately 10% of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PC) cases are attributed to hereditary causes. Individuals with PC and a personal history of another cancer associated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) or Lynch syndrome (LS) may be more likely to carry germline mutations.

24929325
Germline mutations of TP53 gene in breast cancer
Germline alterations of the TP53 gene encoding the p53 protein have been observed in the majority of families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare dominantly inherited disorder with breast cancer. Genomic DNA samples of 182 breast cancer cases and 186 controls were sequenced for TP53 mutations in the exon 5-9 and intervening introns 5, 7-9. Direct sequencing was done using Applied Biosystem 3730 DNA analyzer. In the present study, we observed nine mutations in the sequenced region, of which five were novel. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) was done for all the mutations; C14181T, T14201G, and G13203A have shown deviation from HWE. High linkage disequilibrium (LD) was observed between C14181T (rs129547788) and T14201G (rs12951053) (r (2) = 0.98.3; D' = 1.00), whereas other observed mutations do not show strong LD with any of the other mutations. None of the intronic mutations has shown significant association with the breast cancer, two exonic mutations G13203A (rs28934578) and A14572G are significantly (P = 0.04, P = 0.007) associated with breast cancer. Germline mutations observed in DNA-binding domain of the gene showed significant association with breast cancer. This study reports five novel germline mutations in the TP53 gene out of which one mutation may confer significant risk to the breast cancer. Mutations in DNA-binding domain of TP53 gene may play role in the early onset and prognosis of breast cancer. The population-based studies of germline mutations in DNA-binding domain of TP53 gene helps in identification of individuals and families who are at risk of developing cancers.

30239254
A novel p.Gly187Arg TP53 variant appears to result in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome characterized by pathogenic variants in the TP53 gene on chromosome 17. The most common cancers in Li-Fraumeni kindreds include sarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma. We report a 9-month-old male who was diagnosed with an adrenocortical tumor and later found to harbor a novel TP53 c.559 G > C germline variant, resulting in p.Gly187Arg. Family history included early-onset breast cancer in his paternal grandmother and paternal great-grandfather, as well as colon cancer at age 31 in a paternal cousin. The same TP53 variant was later confirmed in his paternal grandmother. Based on this information, his father (age 28, obligate carrier for the variant) was referred for colonoscopic screening and found to have multiple adenomatous polyps. This previously undescribed variant lies at an exon/intron boundary and is predicted to decrease splice site efficiency with resulting altered splicing or exon skipping. Our patient's family history provides limited evidence that this variant is a cause of Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

19238535
Identification and characterization of two novel germ line p53 mutations in the non-LFS/non-LFL breast cancer families in Chinese population
Germ line mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, p53, are known to cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). We sought to identify p53 germ line mutations in potential hereditary breast cancer patients without LFS/LFL phenotype, which will help us establish the genetic testing strategy for p53 in Chinese high-risk breast cancer families. We screened all coding exons and intron-exon boundaries of p53 in 240 women with early-onset breast cancer or affected relatives from four breast disease clinical centers in China by utilizing PCR-DHPLC and DNA sequencing analysis. Additionally, three cell lines (H1299, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231) were transfected with pEGFP-N1-only or pEGFP-N1 vectors expressing either wild-type or two novel identified mutant p53. And then we performed flow cytometry analysis in the transfected cells to determine the status of cell apoptosis, and real-time PCR as well as western blot analysis to ascertain the expression of p53, p21, and p27. Two novel germ line mutations (563T > C and 643_660del18) were detected in two independent families. Neither of them, however, was present in the 768 normal controls. Functional assays revealed that the ability to trigger cell apoptosis and transcriptional activation of target gene under similar expression of p53 were lower in two mutants versus wild-type p53. Deleterious mutations of p53 seemed to be responsible for approximately 1% of non-BRCA1/BRCA2 hereditary breast cancer in Chinese population, and our findings suggested that p53 should be included in genetic testing of Chinese non-LFS/non-LFL high-risk breast cancer families.

12524418
A novel case with germline p53 gene mutation having concurrent multiple primary colon tumours
During a search for causative genes in patients with concurrent multiple primary colon tumours, we found a novel case with a germline mutation of the p53 gene, from GCC (Ala) to GTC (Val) at codon 189. Of the six primary colon tumours that this patient had, one large advanced carcinoma exhibited a somatic p53 mutation and a somatic APC mutation, in addition to the germline p53 mutation. Two early carcinomas and three adenomas had somatic APC mutations but no somatic p53 mutation or loss of the p53 allele. K-ras-2 mutations were detected in an advanced carcinoma and an early carcinoma. The present results suggest that a patient with a certain type of germline p53 mutation is predisposed to concurrent multiple colon tumours. It is also suggested that in such a patient, a somatic APC mutation is involved in tumour formation and that an additional somatic p53 mutation contributes to tumour progression.

28499267
A novel germline TP53 mutation p.Pro190Arg detected in a patient with lung and bilateral breast cancers
Purpose:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare genetic disease with strong predispositions to multiple early-onset neoplasms, mostly sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors and adrenocortical carcinomas (LFS core cancers). In most LFS families the germline mutations of TP53 tumor suppressor gene were found. Lung cancer does not belong to the core cancers of LFS, however its higher incidence is observed in families with TP53 mutations. Our aim was to search for TP53 mutations in female lung cancer patients whose clinico-demographic characteristics suggested a probable genetic predisposition to the disease.

32885271
Multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in the province of Ontario
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic yield of multigene panel testing among patients referred with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC).

7887414
Germ-line p53 mutations in 15 families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Germ-line mutations of the tumor-suppressor gene p53 have been observed in some families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer syndrome in which affected relatives develop a diverse set of early-onset malignancies including breast carcinoma, sarcomas, and brain tumors. The analysis of the p53 gene in LFS families has been limited, in most studies to date, to the region between exon 5 and exon 9. In order to determine the frequency and distribution of germ-line p53 mutations in LFS, we sequenced the 10 coding exons of the p53 gene in lymphocytes and fibroblast cell lines derived from 15 families with the syndrome. Germ-line mutations were observed in eight families. Six mutations were missense mutations located between exons 5 and 8. One mutation was a nonsense mutation in exon 6, and one mutation was a splicing mutation in intron 4, generating aberrant shorter p53 RNA(s). In three families, a mutation of the p53 gene was observed in the fibroblast cell line derived from the proband. However, the mutation was not found in affected relatives in two families and in the blood from the one individual, indicating that the mutation probably occurred during cell culture in vitro. In four families, no mutation was observed. This study indicates that germ-line p53 mutations in LFS are mostly located between exons 5 and 8 and that approximately 50% of patients with LFS have no germ-line mutations in the coding region of the p53 gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

27714481
TP53 and CDKN1A mutation analysis in families with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like syndromes
Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like syndromes (LFS/LFL) represent rare cancer-prone conditions associated mostly with sarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinomas. TP53 germline mutations are present in up to 80 % of families with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and in 20-60 % of families with Li-Fraumeni like phenotypes. The frequency of LFS/LFL families with no TP53 mutations detected suggests the involvement of other genes in the syndrome. In this study, we searched for mutations in TP53 in 39 probands from families with criteria for LFS/LFL. We also searched for mutations in the gene encoding the main mediator of p53 in cell cycle arrest, CDKN1A/p21, in all patients with no mutations in TP53. Eight probands carried germline disease-causing mutations in TP53: six missense mutations and two partial gene deletions. No mutations in CDKN1A coding region were detected. TP53 partial deletions in our cohort represented 25 % (2/8) of the mutations found, a much higher frequency than usually reported, emphasizing the need to search for TP53 rearrangements in patients with LFS/LFL phenotypes. Two benign tumors were detected in two TP53 mutation carriers: an adrenocortical adenoma and a neurofibroma, which raises a question about the possible implication of TP53 mutations on the development of such lesions.

19405127
Identification and characterization of a novel germline p53 mutation in a patient with glioblastoma and colon cancer
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene have been identified in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and patients with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). However, to date, germline p53 mutations in patients not fulfilling the criteria of LFS or LFL have been reported only very rarely. In our study, a novel germline c.584T>C (p.Ile195Thr) mutation of the p53 gene was found in a 21-year-old male with a glioblastoma and colon cancer. He had no family history of cancer within second-degree relatives, and loss of the wild-type p53 allele and overexpression of p53 protein were observed in both tumors. Functional analyses revealed transactivation and growth suppressive function activities of the Thr195-type p53 to be impaired. These results suggest germline p53 mutations to possibly be responsible for a subset of young adult patient with multiple malignant tumors, even those not meeting the clinical criteria for LFS or LFL.

27418648
Genetic features of myelodysplastic syndrome and aplastic anemia in pediatric and young adult patients
The clinical and histopathological distinctions between inherited versus acquired bone marrow failure and myelodysplastic syndromes are challenging. The identification of inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndromes is critical to inform appropriate clinical management. To investigate whether a subset of pediatric and young adults undergoing transplant for aplastic anemia or myelodysplastic syndrome have germline mutations in bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genes, we performed a targeted genetic screen of samples obtained between 1990-2012 from children and young adults with aplastic anemia or myelodysplastic syndrome transplanted at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. Mutations in inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genes were found in 5.1% (5/98) of aplastic anemia patients and 13.6% (15/110) of myelodysplastic syndrome patients. While the majority of mutations were constitutional, a RUNX1 mutation present in the peripheral blood at a 51% variant allele fraction was confirmed to be somatically acquired in one myelodysplastic syndrome patient. This highlights the importance of distinguishing germline versus somatic mutations by sequencing DNA from a second tissue or from parents. Pathological mutations were present in DKC1, MPL, and TP53 among the aplastic anemia cohort, and in FANCA, GATA2, MPL, RTEL1, RUNX1, SBDS, TERT, TINF2, and TP53 among the myelodysplastic syndrome cohort. Family history or physical examination failed to reliably predict the presence of germline mutations. This study shows that while any single specific bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genetic disorder is rare, screening for these disorders in aggregate identifies a significant subset of patients with inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome.

26022348
HBOC multi-gene panel testing: comparison of two sequencing centers
Multi-gene panels are used to identify genetic causes of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) in large patient cohorts. This study compares the diagnostic workflow in two centers and gives valuable insights into different next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategies. Moreover, we present data from 620 patients sequenced at both centers. Both sequencing centers are part of the German consortium for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (GC-HBOC). All 620 patients included in this study were selected following standard BRCA1/2 testing guidelines. A set of 10 sequenced genes was analyzed per patient. Twelve samples were exchanged and sequenced at both centers. NGS results were highly concordant in 12 exchanged samples (205/206 variants = 99.51 %). One non-pathogenic variant was missed at center B due to a sequencing gap (no technical coverage). The custom enrichment at center B was optimized during this study; for example, the average number of missing bases was reduced by a factor of four (vers. 1: 1939.41, vers. 4: 506.01 bp). There were no sequencing gaps at center A, but four CCDS exons were not included in the enrichment. Pathogenic mutations were found in 12.10 % (75/620) of all patients: 4.84 % (30/620) in BRCA1, 4.35 % in BRCA2 (27/620), 0.97 % in CHEK2 (6/620), 0.65 % in ATM (4/620), 0.48 % in CDH1 (3/620), 0.32 % in PALB2 (2/620), 0.32 % in NBN (2/620), and 0.16 % in TP53 (1/620). NGS diagnostics for HBOC-related genes is robust, cost effective, and the method of choice for genetic testing in large cohorts. Adding 8 genes to standard BRCA1- and BRCA2-testing increased the mutation detection rate by one-third.

7978053
Novel germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in a child with incidentally discovered adrenal cortical carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      We report a case of adrenal cortical carcinoma in an infant, which was incidentally discovered by renal sonography after a urinary tract infection. The previous death of a sibling after rhabdomyosarcoma in infancy prompted a search for a heritable p53 tumor suppressor gene mutation in this family.

10389749
Multiple primary tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract: is there a role for constitutional mutations in the p53 gene?
Head-and-neck cancer (HNC) patients have a high risk of developing second primary tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract, the main cause of death. Although the roles of tobacco and diet in multiple head-and-neck carcinogenesis have been thoroughly investigated, little is known about individual genetic susceptibility factors involved in this process. Genomic instability, reflecting the propensity and the susceptibility of the genome to acquire multiple alterations, could be considered a driving force behind multiple carcinogenesis. Mutation of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene has been proposed to play an important role in this process. Therefore, we evaluated the incidence of inherited p53 germ-line alteration(s) in a population of 24 consecutive HNC patients and their first-degree relatives affected by multiple malignancies as well as the occurrence of p53 somatic acquired mutation(s) in 16 cancers, including first and second primaries from 5 HNCs of the same group. Mutations in exons 4-11 of the p53 gene were investigated using SSCP-PCR analysis and DNA sequencing. Analysis was extended to the peripheral blood and cancer biopsies available from first-degree relatives of cancer-prone families with p53 germ-line mutations. p53 germ-line mutations were identified in the peripheral blood and corresponding cancers of 3 HNC patients who had multiple malignancies. The only missense mutation detected was mapped in exon 6; it is a GTG to GAG substitution with an amino acid change from Val to Glu at codon 197. The remaining 2 p53 germ-line mutations were single-nucleotide substitutions without amino acid change in exon 6 (codon 213, CGA to CGG) and in exon 8 (codon 295, CCT to CCC), respectively. These mutations were found in HNC patients with a family history of cancer. Abnormal expression of wild-type p53 protein in normal and pathological tissues from patients with the same sense single-nucleotide substitutions was detected by immuno-histochemistry.

33818021
Clinical Features of Breast Cancer in South Korean Patients with Germline TP53 Gene Mutations
Purpose:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal cancer syndrome caused by a germline mutation in the TP53 gene. Breast cancer in LFS patients is of various subtypes; however, limited data are available on the clinicopathological features of these subtypes and their appropriate treatments. This study aimed to review the clinical features and treatments for breast cancer in South Korean patients with germline TP53 mutations.

25945745
DNA methylation patterns of candidate genes regulated by thymine DNA glycosylase in patients with TP53 germline mutations
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant, hereditary cancer predisposition disorder. In Brazil, the p.R337H TP53 founder mutation causes the variant form of LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome. The occurrence of cancer and age of disease onset are known to vary, even in patients carrying the same mutation, and several mechanisms such as genetic and epigenetic alterations may be involved in this variability. However, the extent of involvement of such events has not been clarified. It is well established that p53 regulates several pathways, including the thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) pathway, which regulates the DNA methylation of several genes. This study aimed to identify the DNA methylation pattern of genes potentially related to the TDG pathway (CDKN2A, FOXA1, HOXD8, OCT4, SOX2, and SOX17) in 30 patients with germline TP53 mutations, 10 patients with wild-type TP53, and 10 healthy individuals. We also evaluated TDG expression in patients with adrenocortical tumors (ADR) with and without the p.R337H TP53 mutation. Gene methylation patterns of peripheral blood DNA samples assessed by pyrosequencing revealed no significant differences between the three groups. However, increased TDG expression was observed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR in p.R337H carriers with ADR. Considering the rarity of this phenotype and the relevance of these findings, further studies using a larger sample set are necessary to confirm our results.

32029870
Germline mutations of multiple breast cancer-related genes are differentially associated with triple-negative breast cancers and prognostic factors
Genetic testing for BRCA1/2 mutations has become the standard clinical practice. Recent findings suggest the clinical significance of multigene panel testing of BRCA1/2 and other cancer-related genes. However, the clinical features of patients with breast cancer with germline mutations identified using multigene panels remain unclear. In this study, DNA samples from 583 Chinese women with breast cancer were subjected to target sequencing for 54 cancer-related genes using a pre-capture pooling method followed by next-generation sequencing. We identified 79 pathogenic germline mutations in 21 cancer-related genes. Forty-five patients (7.7%) harbored BRCA1/2 mutations, and 38 patients (6.5%) carried pathogenic mutations in the remaining 19 genes. PALB2 was the most commonly (1.2%) mutated gene other than BRCA1/2. Most of the identified pathogenic mutations were novel, suggesting mutation screening by using multigene panel testing is important particularly for non-European populations. Mutations in BRCA1/2 and the other cancer-related genes were differentially associated with clinical features. BRCA1 mutation carriers were strongly associated with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), whereas BRCA2 mutation carriers were not. Tumors in BRCA1-mutation carriers had a high histological grade. Patients with BRCA2-mutated breast cancers were likely to develop E-cadherin-negative tumors with bone metastases. Furthermore, mutations in PALB2 were strongly associated with TNBC. We demonstrated the usefulness of multigene panel testing and observed that a substantial proportion of patients with breast cancer had hereditary risk factors. Identifying differential associations between mutation status and clinical features will advance our understanding regarding the pathologies of this heterogeneous disease.

30833958
Identification of the Germline Mutation Profile in Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma by Whole Exome Sequencing
Background: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is associated with poor prognosis and occurs with high frequency in China. The germline mutation profile in ESCC remains unclear, and therefore, the discovery of oncogenic alterations in ESCC is urgently needed. This study investigates the germline mutation profile and reveals associations among genotype-environment interactions in ESCC. Methods: Whole exome sequencing and follow-up analysis were performed in 77 matched tumor-normal ESCC specimens to examine the germline profiles. Additionally, associations among genotype-environment interactions were investigated. Results: We identified 84 pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutations and 51 rare variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Twenty VUS with InterVar evidence of a score of moderate pathogenicity (PM) 2/PM2+ supporting pathogenicity (PP) 1 were found to have pathogenic significance. CYP21A2 was the most frequently mutated gene, and the p.Gln319* variant was identified in 6.5% (5/77) of patients. The TP53 p.V197E mutation, located within the DNA binding domain, was found in 1.3% (1/77) of patients. In total, the 11.7% (9/77) of individuals with homologous recombination (HR) VUS were more likely to have well-differentiated tumors than those without (P = 0.003). The degree of lymph node metastasis was correlated with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) and VUS group (P < 0.05). Moreover, the 10.4% (8/77) of individuals with mismatch repair (MMR) VUS had a higher tumor mutational burden (TMB), although the correlation was not significant. Conclusions: Our study identified the germline mutation profiles in ESCC, providing novel insights into the molecular pathogenesis of this disease. Our results may also serve as a useful resource for the exploration of the underlying mechanism of ESCC and may provide information for the prevention, diagnosis and risk management of ESCC.

32123317
Blood RNA analysis can increase clinical diagnostic rate and resolve variants of uncertain significance
Purpose:
        
      
      Diagnosis of genetic disorders is hampered by large numbers of variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) identified through next-generation sequencing. Many such variants may disrupt normal RNA splicing. We examined effects on splicing of a large cohort of clinically identified variants and compared performance of bioinformatic splicing prediction tools commonly used in diagnostic laboratories.

11263856
A double germline mutations in the APC and p53 genes
Germline mutation in the APC gene is required for the initiation of the development of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). According to Fearon and Vogelstein model, further somatic mutations in the K-ras oncogene, DCC gene and p53 tumor suppressor gene are prerequisite for development of colon carcinoma. We have found that the germline mutations in the DNA isolated from lymphocytes of an 18 years old girl with extraordinary expressive phenotype in codons 1060-1061 of the APC gene result in truncation of the APC protein. The mutation in codons 12 and 13 of the K-ras oncogene was not detected, but another germline mutation was found in codon 210 of the p53 gene. Furthermore, no one of these germline mutations was detected in the DNA of peripheral blood lymphocytes of the patient's 21 years old healthy sister. Until now, there has been no evidence about the expressive phenotype due to mutation in codons 1060-1061 of the APC gene; the role of germline missense mutation in codon 210 of the p53 gene in the FAP malignant process remains to be elucidated too. The effect of the combination of germline mutation in two different tumor suppressor genes in the progress of disease is discussed.

27957778
Assessment of TP53 Polymorphisms and MDM2 SNP309 in Premenopausal Breast Cancer Risk
Germline polymorphic variants in cancer predisposition genes such as TP53 have been shown to impact the risk of premenopausal cancer. Accordingly, the aim of this study was to assess the spectrum of polymorphisms in TP53 and its negative regulatory gene, MDM2 (SNP309:T>G) in patients with premenopausal breast cancer. Our findings in a cohort of 40 female patients demonstrate no significant correlation between the studied polymorphisms and risk of premenopausal breast cancer. Although one polymorphism is found in high frequency in this cohort (rs1800372:A>G, 9.0%), it was not associated with the risk of developing cancer before the age of 35 years in an extended cohort of 1,420 breast cancer cases. Functional studies of the rs1800372:A>G polymorphic allele reveal that it does not affect p53 transactivation function. Further study of variants or mutations in other cancer susceptibility genes is warranted to refine our understanding of the germline contribution to premenopausal breast cancer susceptibility.

30796655
Germline TP53 mutation spectrum in Sudanese premenopausal breast cancer patients: correlations with reproductive factors
Purpose:
        
      
      The role of non-genetic factors as modifiers of TP53-related hereditary breast cancer (BC) risk is debated. In this regard, little is known about the impact of germline TP53 mutations on BC in sub-Saharan Africa, where the disease often presents in non-contraceptive multiparous premenopausal women with extended history of breastfeeding. Herein, we report the germline TP53 mutations found in a series of 92 Sudanese premenopausal BC patients characterized for reproductive history.

18208484
Choroid plexus carcinoma: a new case associated with a novel TP53 germ line mutation


33332384
Nationwide germline whole genome sequencing of 198 consecutive pediatric cancer patients reveals a high incidence of cancer prone syndromes
Purpose:
        
      
      Historically, cancer predisposition syndromes (CPSs) were rarely established for children with cancer. This nationwide, population-based study investigated how frequently children with cancer had or were likely to have a CPS.

8869100
A new germline TP53 gene mutation in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
This report describes an unusual clinical presentation of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Family history revealed a mild aggregation of adult cancers in one generation, and an unusual clustering of brain tumours of early childhood in the following generation. In order to evaluate the genetic basis for cancer predisposition in this family, molecular genetic analysis for the occurrence of germline TP53 tumour suppressor gene mutations was performed on 12 siblings of two generations. Indirect mutation analysis was performed by the single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique. Alterations were characterised by automated direct fluorescence sequencing analysis. Tumour material was also examined for p53 protein accumulation by immunohistochemistry. Initially, a TP53 gene germline missense mutation was detected in an 11-year-old kindred with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) following intensive treatment of a brain tumour. In peripheral blood and bone marrow samples of this proband, a reduction to hemizygosity occurred. During AML treatment, detection of LOH of 17p was used as a marker for clonality and treatment control. The mutation was found to be inherited from the proband's mother, who was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 48 years. Further, three siblings were carriers, and two are apparently healthy at the age of 21 and 23 years. Knowledge of germline mutations may allow accurate DNA-based carrier diagnosis which is of important clinical significance for treatment strategy and control. Furthermore, the occurrence of unaffected carriers in this family raises questions about appropriate methods of cancer surveillance and counselling for these people.

11920788
Analysis of TP53 germline mutations in pediatric tumor patients using DNA microarray-based sequencing technology
Background:
        
      
      Whereas in sporadic human malignancies mutations of the TP53 tumor-suppressor gene occur in cancers of almost every organ and histologic subtype, patients with an inborn TP53 defect are at high risk to develop, in particular, soft tissue and bone sarcomas, brain tumors, leukaemias, adrenocortical tumors, and breast cancer. To demonstrate the usefulness of microarray technology applied to TP53 sequencing in pediatric tumors, we investigated young patients suffering from tumors typical of the Li-Fraumeni context who were, therefore, candidates for harboring inborn defects in tumor-suppressor genes.

8134126
Predominantly tumor-limited expression of a mutant allele in a Japanese family carrying a germline p53 mutation
Germline mutations of p53 have been implicated as a cause of cancer susceptibility in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Since inactivation of p53 has been suggested to play an important causative role in lung cancer, the present study of the prevalence of germline mutations in 148 patients with this neoplasm was performed. None of 138 randomly chosen patients were found to carry such mutations, while a single patient had a nonsense mutation at codon 213 among 10 patients selected for early onset and/or occurrence of multiple primary cancers. In contrast to the previous report of biallelic expression of p53 in a case with a germline missense mutation, preferential expression of the wild-type allele was observed in the heterozygous state in both normal lung and peripheral blood lymphocytes of our case, whereas expression of mutant mRNA was readily detectable in her lung cancer in the absence of the remaining wild-type allele. Interestingly, the family history of the proband showed a mild aggregation of adulthood cancers and a high prevalence of stomach cancer, a rare component in American families affected by the syndrome. These observations suggest the presence of heterogeneity with regard to molecular and clinical features of germline p53 mutations.

16401470
Prevalence of early onset colorectal cancer in 397 patients with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background & aims:
        
      
      Hereditary colorectal cancer is associated most commonly with the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer or familial adenomatous polyposis syndromes. We investigated the prevalence of early onset colorectal cancer and the frequency of p53 germline mutations in 64 families from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) registry.

20522432
TP53 germline mutation testing in 180 families suspected of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutation detection rate and relative frequency of cancers in different familial phenotypes
BACKGROUND Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Most families fulfilling the classical diagnostic criteria harbour TP53 germline mutations. However, TP53 germline mutations may also occur in less obvious phenotypes. As a result, different criteria are in use to decide which patients qualify for TP53 mutation analysis, including the LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) and Chompret criteria. We investigated which criteria for TP53 mutation analysis resulted in the highest mutation detection rate and sensitivity in Dutch families. We describe the tumour spectrum in TP53-positive families and calculated tumour type specific relative risks. METHOD A total of 180 Dutch families referred for TP53 mutation analysis were evaluated. Tumour phenotypes were verified by pathology reports or clinical records. RESULTS A TP53 germline mutation was identified in 24 families. When the Chompret criteria were used 22/24 mutations were detected (sensitivity 92%, mutation detection rate 21%). In LFS and LFL families 18/24 mutations were found (sensitivity 75%). The two mutations detected outside the 'Chompret group' were found in a child with rhabdomyosarcoma and a young woman with breast cancer. In the mutation carriers, in addition to the classical LFS tumour types, colon and pancreatic cancer were also found significantly more often than in the general population. CONCLUSION We suggest TP53 mutation testing for all families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. In addition, TP53 mutation testing can be considered in the event of childhood sarcoma and breast cancer before 30 years. In addition to the risk for established LFS tumour types, TP53-positive individuals may also have an elevated risk for pancreatic and colon cancer.

9290701
Screening the p53 status of human cell lines using a yeast functional assay
We have screened the p53 status of 156 human cell lines, including 142 tumor cell lines from 27 different tumor types and 14 cell lines from normal tissues by using functional analysis of separated alleles in yeast. This assay enables us to score wild-type p53 expression on the basis of the ability of expressed p53 to transactivate the reporter gene HIS3 via the p53-responsive GAL1 promotor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Of 142 tumor cell lines, at least 104 lines (73.2%) were found to express the mutated p53 gene: 94 lines (66.2%) were mutated in both alleles, three lines (2.1%) were heterozygous, and no p53 cDNA was amplified from seven lines (4.9%). Of the 14 cell lines originating from normal tissues, all the transformed or immortalized cell lines expressed mutant p53 only. Yeast cells expressing mutant p53 derived from 94 cell lines were analyzed for temperature-sensitive growth. p53 cDNA from eight cell lines showed p53-dependent temperature-sensitive growth, growing at 30 degrees C but not at 37 degrees C. Four temperature-sensitive p53 mutations were isolated: CAT-->CGT at codon 214 (H214R), TAC-->TGC at codon 234 (Y234C), GTG-->ATG at codon 272 (V272M), and GAG-->AAG (E285K). Functionally wild-type p53 was detected in 38 tumor cell lines (26.8%) and all of the diploid fibroblasts at early and late population doubling levels. These results strongly support the previous findings that p53 inactivation is one of the most frequent genetic events that occurs during carcinogenesis and immortalization.

28135145
Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations in Individuals With Colorectal Cancer
Purpose Hereditary factors play an important role in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk, yet the prevalence of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations in patients with CRC unselected for high-risk features (eg, early age at diagnosis, personal/family history of cancer or polyps, tumor microsatellite instability [MSI], mismatch repair [MMR] deficiency) is unknown. Patients and Methods We recruited 1,058 participants who received CRC care in a clinic-based setting without preselection for age at diagnosis, personal/family history, or MSI/MMR results. All participants underwent germline testing for mutations in 25 genes associated with inherited cancer risk. Each gene was categorized as high penetrance or moderate penetrance on the basis of published estimates of the lifetime cancer risks conferred by pathogenic germline mutations in that gene. Results One hundred five (9.9%; 95% CI, 8.2% to 11.9%) of 1,058 participants carried one or more pathogenic mutations, including 33 (3.1%) with Lynch syndrome (LS). Twenty-eight (96.6%) of 29 available LS CRCs demonstrated abnormal MSI/MMR results. Seventy-four (7.0%) of 1,058 participants carried non-LS gene mutations, including 23 (2.2%) with mutations in high-penetrance genes (five APC, three biallelic MUTYH, 11 BRCA1/2, two PALB2, one CDKN2A, and one TP53), 15 of whom lacked clinical histories suggestive of their underlying mutation. Thirty-eight (3.6%) participants had moderate-penetrance CRC risk gene mutations (19 monoallelic MUTYH, 17 APC*I1307K, two CHEK2). Neither proband age at CRC diagnosis, family history of CRC, nor personal history of other cancers significantly predicted the presence of pathogenic mutations in non-LS genes. Conclusion Germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations are carried by 9.9% of patients with CRC. MSI/MMR testing reliably identifies LS probands, although 7.0% of patients with CRC carry non-LS mutations, including 1.0% with BRCA1/2 mutations.

30216591
Diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome: Differentiating TP53 germline mutations from clonal hematopoiesis: Results of the observational AGO-TR1 trial
The Li-Fraumeni cancer predisposition syndrome (LFS1) presents with a variety of tumor types and the TP53 gene is covered by most diagnostic cancer gene panels. We demonstrate that deleterious TP53 variants identified in blood-derived DNA of 523 patients with ovarian cancer (AGO-TR1 trial) were not causal for the patients' ovarian cancer in three out of six TP53-positive cases. In three out of six patients, deleterious TP53 mutations were identified with low variant fractions in blood-derived DNA but not in the tumor of the patient seeking advice. The analysis of the TP53 and PPM1D genes, both intimately involved in chemotherapy-induced and/or age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH), in 523 patients and 1,053 age-matched female control individuals revealed that CH represents a frequent event following chemotherapy, affecting 26 of the 523 patients enrolled (5.0%). Considering that TP53 mutations may arise from chemotherapy-induced CH, our findings help to avoid false-positive genetic diagnoses of LFS1.

18307025
A Japanese patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who had nine primary malignancies associated with a germline mutation of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene
We describe a patient who had nine primary malignant tumors and a germline mutation in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, characteristically found in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). A 15-year-old girl with no family history of cancer was referred to our hospital because of pain and swelling of the right knee. Osteosarcoma was diagnosed. The patient received chemotherapy followed by surgery and had a remission. After the age of 28 years, nine primary malignant tumors developed successively, including right breast cancer, colon cancer, malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) of the abdominal wall, right lung double cancers, bilateral breast cancers, and MFH of the left thigh. This is the second highest number of types of primary malignant tumors to be reported in LFS. All tumors were treated by a multidisciplinary approach, including surgery. Genetic analysis revealed a germline missense mutation in the p53 gene (c.659 A > G), resulting in Y220C, which has been reported in three families with LFS. The patient died of lung metastasis from MFH at the age of 37 years. Despite the multiple tumors, repeated induction of remissions resulted in long survival. Our findings suggest that a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, including surgery, is beneficial in patients with LFS.

11668501
Comparative analysis of the NF2, TP53, PTEN, KRAS, NRAS and HRAS genes in sporadic and radiation-induced human meningiomas
Irradiation to the head is associated with a significantly increased incidence of meningiomas. Radiation-induced meningiomas morphologically resemble their sporadically arising counterparts; however, they frequently exhibit a more malignant phenotype. Several genes have been shown to carry mutations in meningiomas, with the NF2 gene being most frequently affected. To examine whether the NF2 gene also plays a role in the development of radiation-induced meningiomas, we compiled a series of meningiomas from 25 patients with a history of previous cranial radiation. This series was compared with 21 atypical WHO grade II meningiomas and 15 anaplastic WHO grade III meningiomas, all from patients without a history of prior irradiation. NF2 mutations occurred significantly more often in sporadic atypical and anaplastic than in radiation-induced meningiomas (p < 0.02). In addition, all meningiomas were examined for mutations in the PTEN, TP53, HRAS, KRAS and NRAS genes. Two mutations in the TP53 gene in a sporadic and a radiation-induced tumor were detected. PTEN mutations were observed in 1 anaplastic and 1 radiation-induced meningioma. No structural alterations were seen in the RAS genes. Our data suggest that, while there is a certain overlap in the mutational spectrum, NF2 mutations may not play such a prominent role in the pathogenesis of radiation-induced compared to sporadic meningiomas.

25637381
Actionable exomic incidental findings in 6503 participants: challenges of variant classification
Recommendations for laboratories to report incidental findings from genomic tests have stimulated interest in such results. In order to investigate the criteria and processes for assigning the pathogenicity of specific variants and to estimate the frequency of such incidental findings in patients of European and African ancestry, we classified potentially actionable pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in all 4300 European- and 2203 African-ancestry participants sequenced by the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP). We considered 112 gene-disease pairs selected by an expert panel as associated with medically actionable genetic disorders that may be undiagnosed in adults. The resulting classifications were compared to classifications from other clinical and research genetic testing laboratories, as well as with in silico pathogenicity scores. Among European-ancestry participants, 30 of 4300 (0.7%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.1%) had a disruptive variant that was expected to be pathogenic, whereas 52 (1.2%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. For African-ancestry participants, six of 2203 (0.3%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.3%) had an expected pathogenic disruptive variant, whereas 13 (0.6%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling mammalian conservation score and the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion summary score of conservation, substitution, regulation, and other evidence were compared across pathogenicity assignments and appear to have utility in variant classification. This work provides a refined estimate of the burden of adult onset, medically actionable incidental findings expected from exome sequencing, highlights challenges in variant classification, and demonstrates the need for a better curated variant interpretation knowledge base.

7706467
Germline p53 mutations are frequently detected in young children with rhabdomyosarcoma
We investigated the possibility that a proportion of children with sporadic rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) carry constitutional mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. 33 patients with sporadic RMS at two large outpatient pediatric oncology clinics submitted blood samples. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and PCR was used to amplify exons 2-11 of the p53 gene. Amplified genomic DNA was screened for the presence of germline p53 mutations using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. The DNA sequence of those samples that showed aberrant migration of bands on SSCP analysis was determined to identify the precise nature of the gene mutations. Patient records were reviewed to assess clinical correlates of the mutant p53 carrier state. Heterozygous constitutional mutations were detected in 3/33 patient samples screened. Two of these missense mutations are located in exon 7 and one in exon 8 of the p53 gene. The presence of mutations was not correlated with tumor histology, stage, or site. However, an association between young age at diagnosis and presence of a constitutional p53 mutation was noted: 3/13 children under the age of 3 yr at diagnosis carried mutations, whereas none of 20 children over 3 yr of age at diagnosis harbored a detectable constitutional mutation. These results in children with RMS corroborates previous findings in other clinical settings suggesting that the mutant p53 carrier state may predispose individuals to malignancy at an early age. Although this study did not assess whether the mutations were preexisting or new germline alterations, assessment of close relatives of RMS patients for cancer risk and predictive genetic testing may be indicated.

28975465
Expanding the spectrum of germline variants in cancer
Our ability to identify germline variants in hereditary cancer cases remains challenged by the incomplete cataloging of relevant genes and lack of consensus on who should be tested. We designed a panel [hereditary oncogenesis predisposition evaluation (HOPE)] that encompasses most of the genes known to be associated with cancer development and tested its yield on more than 1300 samples of cancer patients. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in high and intermediate risk genes were identified in 16, 23.9, 9.7 and 2.7%, respectively, of peripheral blood or normal tissue samples taken from patients with breast, ovarian, colorectal and thyroid cancer. To confirm specificity of these findings, we tested an ethnically matched cohort of 816 individuals and only identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 1.59% (0.98% in high risk and 0.61% in intermediate risk). Remarkably, pathogenic or likely pathogenic alleles in DNA repair/genomic instability genes (other than BRCA2, ATM and PALB2) accounted for at least 16.8, 11.1, 50 and 45.5% of mutation-positive breast, ovarian, thyroid and colorectal cancer patients, respectively. Family history was noticeably lacking in a substantial fraction of mutation-positive cases (63.7, 81.5, 42.4 and 87.5% in breast, ovarian, colorectal and thyroid, respectively). Our results show high contribution of germline mutations to cancer predisposition that extends beyond "classical" hereditary cancer genes. Family history was lacking in 63.5% mutation-positive cases, shows that hereditary cancer need not appear familial and suggests that relaxed selection of cancer patients for hereditary cancer panels should be considered.

25925845
Germline TP53 mutational spectrum in French Canadians with breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Specific germline mutations in the hereditary breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility (HBC/HBOC) genes, BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, have been shown to recur in French Canadians of Quebec, Canada, and this has been attributed to common ancestors. Germline TP53 mutation carriers are known to segregate in Li-Fraumeni syndrome families, which feature young age of onset breast cancer. We have reported rare TP53 mutation carriers in French Canadian HBC families, though none recurred possibly due to the limited number of cancer families investigated. Here we describe TP53 germline mutations found in French Canadian cancer families provided from hereditary cancer clinics; investigate 37 new BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative HBC/HBOC families for the TP53 mutations; and assess the frequency of TP53 mutations in a 1235 French Canadian breast cancer cases not selected for family history of cancer.

26641009
Inherited mutations in cancer susceptibility genes are common among survivors of breast cancer who develop therapy-related leukemia
Background:
        
      
      Risk factors for the development of therapy-related leukemia (TRL), an often lethal late complication of cytotoxic therapy, remain poorly understood and may differ for survivors of different malignancies. Survivors of breast cancer (BC) now account for the majority of TRL cases, making the study of TRL risk factors in this population a priority.

8550239
Incidence of germ-line p53 mutations in patients with gliomas
Epidemiological studies on intracranial tumors have suggested that the observed familial aggregation of a proportion of gliomas may be due to inherited predisposition to their development. In the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) associated with germ-line mutations of the p53 gene, nervous-system tumors are observed with increased frequency. However, the contribution of germ-line p53 mutation to the incidence of brain tumors has not been investigated. In order to address this point, we have performed 2 independent investigations. First, we have examined an unselected series of brain tumors. Whenever the presence of a p53 mutation in the tumor was observed, the possible germ-line origin of the mutation was investigated. Germ-line p53 mutations were also analyzed in constitutional DNA of patients with gliomas that had been selected for an unusual personal or familial history of cancer. Germ-line p53 mutations were detected in 1 out of 80 unselected cases and in 3 out of 15 selected cases (20%). We conclude that germ-line p53 mutation may contribute to a small fraction of gliomas that develop in the general population. The presence of a personal or familial history of cancer in a patient with glioma should prompt the search for a germ-line p53 mutation. However, the low frequency of p53 germ-line mutation suggests that alterations of this gene may not account for most familial cases of gliomas.

12695689
Leukemic and non-leukemic lymphocytes from patients with Li Fraumeni syndrome demonstrate loss of p53 function, Bcl-2 family dysregulation and intrinsic resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic drugs but not flavopiridol
Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is characterised by a predisposition to the early onset of certain tumors and is associated with germline mutation of the anti-oncogene p53. In this study we analysed the in vitro responses of lymphocytes from two LFS patients to chemotherapeutic drugs in terms of apoptosis induction and the expression of key intracellular proteins that regulate this process. One of the LFS patients also suffered from B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and hence presented with a light-chain restricted B-cell lymphocytosis while the other patient had entirely normal blood counts. The B-lymphocytes from both LFS patients showed a marked degree of resistance to chlorambucil and fludarabine when compared to age-matched controls but were remarkably sensitive to the novel flavone, flavopiridol. Loss of function of p53 was demonstrated by a failure to induce Bax and p21 protein expression. In addition, altered basal expression patterns of Bcl-2 and Bax, two key regulators of apoptosis, were found in the LFS lymphocytes when compared with controls. These results suggest that LFS lymphocytes carrying a p53 mutation show intrinsic resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic drugs and this is associated with dysregulation of Bcl-2 family proteins. Furthermore, The innate resistance profile was similar in leukemic and non-leukemic lymphocytes and was therefore independent of genetic changes acquired during malignant transformation. Novel agents that induce p53-independent cell killing may be useful not only in the treatment of LFS-associated tumors but also drug resistant tumors in general where p53 and/or Bcl-2 family dysregulation is a feature.

17318340
Two TP53 germline mutations in a classical Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a combination of tumors including sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, adrenocortical carcinoma and leukemia. Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 are associated with LFS. We present a family with LFS in which initially a novel germline TP53 intron 5 splice site mutation was found. A second germline TP53 mutation, the exon 7 Asn235Ser (704A-->G) mutation, was detected in this family through pre-symptomatic DNA testing. This latter mutation has been reported repeatedly in the literature as a pathogenic mutation involved in LFS. We provide evidence for pathogenicity of the novel intron 5 splice site mutation, whereas this evidence is lacking for the exon 7 Asn235Ser (704A-->G) mutation. Our findings emphasize the importance of performing additional tests in case of germline sequence variants with uncertain functional effects.

24763289
Utilization of multigene panels in hereditary cancer predisposition testing: analysis of more than 2,000 patients
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to determine the clinical and molecular characteristics of 2,079 patients who underwent hereditary cancer multigene panel testing.

22851211
Routine TP53 testing for breast cancer under age 30: ready for prime time?
It is well known that early-onset breast cancer may be due to an inherited predisposition. When evaluating women diagnosed with breast cancer under age 30, two important syndromes are typically considered: Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Many women are offered genetic testing for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes; however, few are offered genetic testing for mutations in the TP53 gene. There is a concern that overly restrictive testing of TP53 may fail to recognize families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We reviewed the genetic test results and family histories of all women with early-onset breast cancer who had genetic testing of the TP53 gene at the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children. Of the 28 women tested, six (33.3 %) had a mutation in the TP53 gene; a mutation was found in 7.7 % of women who did not meet current criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. By reviewing similar data published between 2000 and 2011, we estimate that 5-8 % of women diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer, and who have a negative family history, may have a mutation in the TP53 gene. Given the potential benefits versus harms of this testing, we discuss the option of simultaneous testing of all three genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53) for women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 30.

29875428
The impact of variant classification on the clinical management of hereditary cancer syndromes
Purpose:
        
      
      The reclassification of genetic variants poses a significant challenge for laboratories and clinicians. Variant review has resulted in the reclassification of variants of unknown significance as well as the reclassification of previously established pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants. These reclassifications have the potential to alter the clinical management of patients with hereditary cancer syndromes.

12406399
[Description of a new TP53 gene germline mutation in a family with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Genetic counselling to healthy mutation carriers]
Background:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by early-onset breast cancer, soft-tissue sarcomas and osteosarcomas, acute leukemia, adrenocortical neoplasms and central nervous system tumors. Germline mutations in gene TP53 are identified in a percentage of affected families.

32427313
Contribution of Germline Predisposition Gene Mutations to Breast Cancer Risk in African American Women
Background:
        
      
      The risks of breast cancer in African American (AA) women associated with inherited mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes are not well defined. Thus, whether multigene germline hereditary cancer testing panels are applicable to this population is unknown. We assessed associations between mutations in panel-based genes and breast cancer risk in 5054 AA women with breast cancer and 4993 unaffected AA women drawn from 10 epidemiologic studies.

14673037
TP53, BRCA1, and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes are not commonly mutated in survivors of Hodgkin's disease with second primary neoplasms
Purpose:
        
      
      Despite recognition that second malignant neoplasms (SMNs) contribute significantly to mortality after the successful treatment of Hodgkin's disease (HD), little is known about the molecular events leading to secondary tumors. Factors contributing to second cancer risk include the carcinogenic effects of ionizing radiation and chemotherapy, in combination with possible host susceptibility. To clarify whether host genetic factors contribute to secondary tumorigenesis, we performed mutational analyses of the TP53, BRCA1, and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes in a cohort of 44 HD patients developing one or more SMN.

31748977
Radiotherapy-induced malignancies in breast cancer patients with TP53 pathogenic germline variants (Li-Fraumeni syndrome)
The risk of radiotherapy-induced malignancies (RIMs) is a concern when treating Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni Like (LFL) patients. However, the type of TP53 pathogenic germline variant may possibly influence this risk. TP53 p.R337H mutation is particularly prevalent in Brazil. We aimed to evaluate the outcomes of patients with pathogenic TP53 variants treated for localized breast cancer in a Brazilian cohort. We evaluated retrospectively a cohort of patients with germline TP53 pathogenic variants treated for localized breast cancer between December 1999 and October 2017. All patients were followed by the Hereditary Cancer Group of an academic cancer center. Our primary objective was to evaluate the occurrence of RIMs after adjuvant radiotherapy. Sixteen patients were evaluated; 10 (62.5%) had a germline TP53 p.R337H pathogenic variant. Median age was 39.8 years. Thirteen patients had invasive ductal carcinoma: 8 (61.5%) were hormone receptor-positive; 6 (46.1%), human epithelial growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-amplified. Three patients had ductal carcinoma in situ. Most patients (N = 12/16, 75%) received adjuvant radiotherapy. After a median follow-up of 52.5 months, 2 patients (2/12, 16.6%) had RIMs. One had a fibrosarcoma and the other, a low-grade leiomyosarcoma. In the group treated with radiotherapy, one distant recurrence was diagnosed (1/12), and no loco-regional recurrence occurred. Among 4 patients who did not receive radiotherapy, 2 presented with loco-regional recurrence. In this cohort of patients with LFS enriched in TP53 p.R337H pathogenic variant, the incidence of RIMs after treatment of localized breast cancer was lower than previous literature. Nevertheless, rates of RIMs were still alarming. Early molecular diagnosis and careful evaluation of treatment risks and benefits are essential for these patients.

23259501
Number of rare germline CNVs and TP53 mutation types
Background:
        
      
      The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), an inherited rare cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a variety of early-onset tumors, is caused by different highly penetrant germline mutations in the TP53 gene; each separate mutation has dissimilar functional and phenotypic effects, which partially clarifies the reported heterogeneity between LFS families. Increases in copy number variation (CNV) have been reported in TP53 mutated individuals, and are also postulated to contribute to LFS phenotypic variability. The Brazilian p.R337H TP53 mutation has particular functional and regulatory properties that differ from most other common LFS TP53 mutations, by conferring a strikingly milder phenotype.

28279309
Allele-specific wild-type TP53 expression in the unaffected carrier parent of children with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder where an oncogenic TP53 germline mutation is passed from parent to child. Tumor protein p53 is a key tumor suppressor regulating cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage. Paradoxically, some mutant TP53 carriers remain unaffected, while their children develop cancer within the first few years of life. To address this paradox, response to UV stress was compared in dermal fibroblasts (dFb) from an affected LFS patient vs. their unaffected carrier parent. UV induction of CDKN1A/p21, a regulatory target of p53, in LFS patient dFb was significantly reduced compared to the unaffected parent. UV exposure also induced significantly greater p53[Ser15]-phosphorylation in LFS patient dFb, a reported property of some mutant p53 variants. Taken together, these results suggested that unaffected parental dFb may express an increased proportion of wild-type vs. mutant p53. Indeed, a significantly increased ratio of wild-type to mutant TP53 allele-specific expression in the unaffected parent dFb was confirmed by RT-PCR-RFLP and RNA-seq analysis. Hence, allele-specific expression of wild-type TP53 may allow an unaffected parent to mount a response to genotoxic stress more characteristic of homozygous wild-type TP53 individuals than their affected offspring, providing protection from the oncogenesis associated with LFS.

31494577
High-sensitivity microsatellite instability assessment for the detection of mismatch repair defects in normal tissue of biallelic germline mismatch repair mutation carriers
Introduction:
        
      
      Lynch syndrome (LS) and constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD) are hereditary cancer syndromes associated with mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency. Tumours show microsatellite instability (MSI), also reported at low levels in non-neoplastic tissues. Our aim was to evaluate the performance of high-sensitivity MSI (hs-MSI) assessment for the identification of LS and CMMRD in non-neoplastic tissues.

32959997
Screening of germline mutations in young Rwandan patients with breast cancers
Background:
        
      
      In Sub-Saharan Africa breast cancer is commonly detected at younger age and the profile is more aggressive with a high mortality rate compared to the European countries. It is suggested that African-specific genetic background plays a key role in this matter. The present study aimed at understanding the role of genetic factors in breast cancer development in young Rwandan.

1679237
Identification of a germ-line mutation in the p53 gene in a patient with an intracranial ependymoma
We detected a germ-line mutation of the p53 gene in a patient with a malignant ependymoma of the posterior fossa. This mutation, which was found at codon 242, resulted in an amino acid substitution in a highly conserved site of exon 7 of the p53 gene; the same mutation was found in both the germ-line and the tumor tissue. This is the most common region of previously described somatic p53 mutations in tumor specimens and of the germ-line p53 mutations in patients with the Li-Fraumeni cancer syndrome. Evaluation of the patient's family revealed several direct maternal and paternal relatives who had died at a young age from different types of cancer. The association of a germ-line p53 mutation with an intracranial malignancy and a strong family history of cancer suggests that p53 gene mutations predispose a person to malignancy and, like retinoblastoma mutations, may be inherited.

24307375
Robust diagnostic genetic testing using solution capture enrichment and a novel variant-filtering interface
Targeted hybridization enrichment prior to next-generation sequencing is a widespread method for characterizing sequence variation in a research setting, and is being adopted by diagnostic laboratories. However, the number of variants identified can overwhelm clinical laboratories with strict time constraints, the final interpretation of likely pathogenicity being a particular bottleneck. To address this, we have developed an approach in which, after automatic variant calling on a standard unix pipeline, subsequent variant filtering is performed interactively, using AgileExomeFilter and AgilePindelFilter (http://dna.leeds.ac.uk/agile), tools designed for clinical scientists with standard desktop computers. To demonstrate the method's diagnostic efficacy, we tested 128 patients using (1) a targeted capture of 36 cancer-predisposing genes or (2) whole-exome capture for diagnosis of the genetically heterogeneous disorder primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). In the cancer cohort, complete concordance with previous diagnostic data was achieved across 793 variant genotypes. A high yield (42%) was also achieved for exome-based PCD diagnosis, underscoring the scalability of our method. Simple adjustments to the variant filtering parameters further allowed the identification of a homozygous truncating mutation in a presumptive new PCD gene, DNAH8. These tools should allow diagnostic laboratories to expand their testing portfolios flexibly, using a standard set of reagents and techniques.

26628864
Using a family history questionnaire to identify adult patients with increased genetic risk for sarcoma
Background:
        
      
      Sarcomas in adults can be associated with hereditary cancer syndromes characterized by early-onset predisposition to numerous types of cancer. Because of variability in familial presentation and the largely unexplained genetic basis of sarcomas, ascertainment of patients for whom a genetics evaluation is most indicated poses challenges. We assessed the utility of a Sarcoma Clinic Genetic Screening (scgs) questionnaire in facilitating that task.

11180592
Use of mutation spectra analysis software
The study and comparison of mutation(al) spectra is an important problem in molecular biology, because these spectra often reflect on important features of mutations and their fixation. Such features include the interaction of DNA with various mutagens, the function of repair/replication enzymes, and properties of target proteins. It is known that mutability varies significantly along nucleotide sequences, such that mutations often concentrate at certain positions, called "hotspots," in a sequence. In this paper, we discuss in detail two approaches for mutation spectra analysis: the comparison of mutation spectra with a HG-PUBL program, (FTP: sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/biology/dna-mutations/hyperg) and hotspot prediction with the CLUSTERM program (www.itba.mi.cnr.it/webmutation; ftp.bionet.nsc.ru/pub/biology/dbms/clusterm.zip). Several other approaches for mutational spectra analysis, such as the analysis of a target protein structure, hotspot context revealing, multiple spectra comparisons, as well as a number of mutation databases are briefly described. Mutation spectra in the lacI gene of E. coli and the human p53 gene are used for illustration of various difficulties of such analysis.

2259385
Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Tumour suppressor genes, whose usual function seems to be controlling normal cell proliferation, have been implicated in many inherited and sporadic forms of malignancies Much evidence supports the concept of tumour formation by loss-of-function mutations in suppressor genes, as predicted by the two-hit model of Knudson and DeMars. The suppressor gene, p53, is affected in such a manner by numerous mutations, which occur in a variety of human tumours. These mutations usually represent the loss of one allele and the substitution of a single base in the other. We have now analysed the p53 gene in a family affected by Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by the occurrence of diverse mesenchymal and epithelial neoplasms at multiple sites. In some instances the neoplasms seem to be related to exposure to carcinogens, including ionizing radiation. The Li-Fraumeni family that we studied had noncancerous skin fibroblasts (NSF) with an unusual radiation-resistant phenotype. DNA derived from the NSF cells of four family members, spanning two generations, had the same point mutation in codon 245 (GGC----GAC) of the p53 gene. This mutation leads to substitution of aspartic acid for glycine in one of the regions identified as a frequent target of point mutations in p53. The NSF cell lines with the mutation also retained the normal p53 allele. This inherited p53 mutation may predispose the members of this family to increased susceptibility to cancer.

1978757
Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms
Familial cancer syndromes have helped to define the role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of cancer. The dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is of particular interest because of the diversity of childhood and adult tumors that occur in affected individuals. The rarity and high mortality of LFS precluded formal linkage analysis. The alternative approach was to select the most plausible candidate gene. The tumor suppressor gene, p53, was studied because of previous indications that this gene is inactivated in the sporadic (nonfamilial) forms of most cancers that are associated with LFS. Germ line p53 mutations have been detected in all five LFS families analyzed. These mutations do not produce amounts of mutant p53 protein expected to exert a trans-dominant loss of function effect on wild-type p53 protein. The frequency of germ line p53 mutations can now be examined in additional families with LFS, and in other cancer patients and families with clinical features that might be attributed to the mutation.

30093976
Clinical genetic testing outcome with multi-gene panel in Asian patients with multiple primary cancers
Background:
        
      
      Developing multiple cancers is an indicator of underlying hereditary cancer predisposition, but there is a paucity of data regarding the clinical genetic testing outcomes of these patients.

8075648
Anaplastic Wilms' tumour, a subtype displaying poor prognosis, harbours p53 gene mutations
The genetics of Wilms' tumour (WT), a paediatric malignancy of the kidney, is complex. Inactivation of the tumour suppressor gene, WT1, is associated with tumour aetiology in approximately 10-15% of WTs. Chromosome 17p changes have been noted in cytogenetic studies of WTs, prompting us to screen 140 WTs for p53 mutations. When histopathology reports were available, p53 mutations were present in eight of eleven anaplastic WTs, a tumour subtype associated with poor prognosis. Amplification of MDM2, a gene whose product binds and sequesters p53, was excluded. Our results indicate that p53 alterations provide a molecular marker for anaplastic WTs.

17427234
Composite adrenal anaplastic neuroblastoma and virilizing adrenocortical tumor with germline TP53 R248W mutation
Composite tumors are extremely rare. Such tumors in adrenal glands are usually of neuroendocrine-neural type and occur mostly in adults. Their pathogenesis remains elusive. We report a patient with composite neuroblastoma (NB), adrenocortical tumor (ACT), and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) with germline TP53 R248W mutation. LFS predisposes to the development of leukemia, sarcomas, adrenocortical and breast carcinomas, brain tumors and, questionably, NB. A unique correlation between a single TP53 mutation (R337H) and ACT has been reported in southern Brazilian children. It remains unclear at this time whether a similar association of NB and R248W in patients with LFS exists.

30553995
DNA variants in Helicobacter pylori infected patients with chronic gastritis, dysplasia and gastric cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      The main scope of this study was to evaluate the importance of selected DNA variants for developing inflammation of gastric mucosa and carcinogenesis in gastrointestinal diseases in patients infected with Helicobacter pylori.

30374176
Outcomes of 92 patient-driven family studies for reclassification of variants of uncertain significance
Purpose:
        
      
      Family studies are an important but underreported source of information for reclassification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). We evaluated outcomes of a patient-driven framework that offered familial VUS reclassification analysis to any adult with any clinically ascertained VUS from any laboratory in the United States.

25612911
Transmission of germline TP53 mutations from male carriers to female partners
Keywords:
        
      
      Genetics; Molecular genetics; Obstetrics and Gynaecology; Oncology.

8134127
Two germ-line mutations affecting the same nucleotide at codon 257 of p53 gene, a rare site for mutations
Codon 257 of the p53 gene is an extremely rare target for somatic mutations (accounting for only two of 1600 published mutations). We report here two constitutional mutations both affecting the second nucleotide of codon 257. A thymine to adenine transversion resulting in an amino acid change from leucine to glutamine was found in one proband who developed multiple independent malignant tumors (osteosarcoma, phyllodes tumor, soft-tissue sarcoma). Her mother died of early-onset breast cancer. In the other case, a deletion resulting in a frameshift in the C-terminal coding region of p53 was found in a woman who was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 34. This woman belongs to a family with features of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In both cases, the p53 mutations identified in the proband was found in other members of the family. Codon 257, even if rarely mutated in somatic cells, may thus be an important target for germ-line mutations.

26534844
Targeted massively parallel sequencing of a panel of putative breast cancer susceptibility genes in a large cohort of multiple-case breast and ovarian cancer families
Introduction:
        
      
      Gene panel testing for breast cancer susceptibility has become relatively cheap and accessible. However, the breast cancer risks associated with mutations in many genes included in these panels are unknown.

26225655
Targeted Resequencing of 30 Genes Improves the Detection of Deleterious Mutations in South Indian Women with Breast and/or Ovarian Cancers
Background:
        
      
      We earlier used PCR-dHPLC for mutation analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2. In this article we report application of targeted resequencing of 30 genes involved in hereditary cancers.

9067756
Three germline mutations in the TP53 gene
Three germline mutations in the TP53 tumor-suppressor gene are reported, two of which are not reported previously. A missense mutation at codon 265 of TP53 was found in three patients of a family that complied with the definition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. A nonsense mutation in codon 306 was found in a woman who had had a rhabdomyosarcoma at age 4 and a subsequent breast cancer at age 22. She was part of a Li-Fraumeni-like family, but the parental origin of the mutation could not be traced. Finally, while screening for somatic alterations in TP53 in a series of 141 sporadic breast tumors, we detected a constitutional missense mutation in codon 235 in a woman diagnosed with breast cancer at age 26 and a recurrence 4 years later. The recurrence, but not the primary tumor, showed an additional missense mutation at codon 245 as well as loss of the wild-type allele. This suggests that the 245 mutation was particularly important for tumor progression and that there might exist heterogeneity in terms of cancer predisposition potential among the various germline TP53 mutations.

1562462
Constitutional p53 mutation in a non-Li-Fraumeni cancer family


30588330
Rare TP53 variant associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome exhibits variable penetrance in a Saudi family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an inherited, autosomal-dominant condition that predisposes individuals to a wide-spectrum of tumors at an early age. Approximately 70% of families with classic LFS have pathogenic variants in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 that disrupt protein function or stability. While more than 70% of pathogenic variants in TP53 are missense variants, the vast majority occur very infrequently, and thus their clinical significance is uncertain or conflicting. Here, we report an extremely rare TP53 missense variant, c.799C > T (p.Arg267Trp), identified in a 2-year-old Saudi proband diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) and six of his first- and second-degree relatives. CPC is frequently found in families with LFS, and this is the first detailed report of a family with this variant. Intriguingly, the proband's father is homozygous for TP53 c.799C > T and phenotypically normal at 39 years of age. While loss of TP53 heterozygosity is often observed in tumors from individuals with LFS, homozygous germline TP53 pathogenic variants are rare. Based on our analysis of this single family, we hypothesize that TP53 c.799C > T has low or variable penetrance for LFS, with predisposition to the development of CPC. The observations from this family have furthered our understanding of the phenotypic variability that may be caused by one variant of TP53, even in the same family, and suggest that other factors (genetic and/or environmental) may play a role in mechanism of disease manifestation in LFS.

1737852
Hereditary and acquired p53 gene mutations in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
The p53 gene was examined in primary lymphoblasts of 25 pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia by the RNase protection assay and by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis in 23 of 25 cases. p53 mutations were found to occur, but at a low frequency (4 of 25). While all four mutations were identified by single strand conformation polymorphism, the comparative sensitivity of RNase protection was 50% (2 of 4). Heterozygosity was retained at mutated codons in 3 of 4 cases. One pedigree was consistent with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and bone marrow from both diagnosis and remission indicated a germline G to T transversion at codon 272 (valine to leucine). Although members of another family were affected with leukemia, a 2-bp deletion in exon 6 was nonhereditary. The other two nonhereditary p53 mutations included a T to G transversion at codon 270 (phenylalanine to cysteine) and a G to C transversion at codon 248 (arginine to proline). These data support the role of both hereditary and acquired p53 mutations in the pathogenesis and/or progression of some cases of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

23175693
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective series of unselected patients with adrenocortical carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a hallmark cancer in families with Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) caused by mutations in the TP53 gene. The prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in children diagnosed with ACC ranges from 50-97%. Although existing criteria advocate for TP53 testing in all patients with ACC regardless of age at diagnosis, the overall prevalence of germline mutations in patients diagnosed with ACC has not been well studied.

8479749
Constitutional mutation in exon 8 of the p53 gene in a patient with multiple primary tumours: molecular and immunohistochemical findings
We report a constitutional mutation of codon 273 in exon 8 of the p53 gene. The affected individual has developed multiple independent benign and malignant tumours (tricholemmoma of the scalp, multiple trichoepitheliomata of the face, osteosarcoma of the ovary, bilateral breast cancer, malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the thigh and endometrial adenocarcinoma) and belongs to a family with some, but not all, features of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The mutation, found in both blood lymphocyte and tumour specimens, is a cytosine to thymine transition at codon 273, resulting in an amino acid change from arginine to cysteine. The mother and sister of the index case both died of tumours at an early age. We have demonstrated that formalin-preserved material from these tumours contains the same C-->T mutation at codon 273, indicating that this mutation has probably been transmitted through the germline. All tumours from the index case, both benign and malignant, showed immunohistochemical positivity with four antibodies to the p53 protein. Positive staining was also seen in scattered nuclei of morphologically normal epidermal keratinocytes and pilosebaceous cells, but not in lymphocytes or other morphologically normal cells from the index case. However, a similar staining pattern in apparently normal tissue was also observed in 13/48 sections from other individuals with various skin conditions (melanocytic naevi, psoriasis and normal skin adjacent to malignant melanoma and fibrous histiocytomas), suggesting that this pattern of p53 staining may not be unique to individuals with constitutional p53 mutations.

8425176
Screening for germ line p53 mutations in children with malignant tumors and a family history of cancer
We have undertaken a routine investigation of the p53 status for all the children treated at our institution either affected by multiple tumors or whose family displays at least one second degree relative or less, affected by cancer before the age of 45 years. We report here on the first set of ten such families, eight of which were identified through a proband with sarcoma. p53 exons 5 to 8 have been sequenced following polymerase chain reaction amplification performed on DNA isolated from total blood. A missense mutation affecting codons 248, 273, and 282 was identified in three families. The mutation was inherited in these three families and was detected in unaffected members. In seven families no mutation was detected in exons 5 to 8.

1565144
Germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in children and young adults with second malignant neoplasms
Background:
        
      
      Acquired mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene have been detected in several human cancers, including colon, breast, and lung cancer. Inherited mutations (transmitted through the germline) of this gene can underlie the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare familial association of breast cancer in young women, childhood sarcomas, and other malignant neoplasms. We investigated the possibility that p53 mutations in the germline are associated with second primary cancers that arise in children and young adults who would not be considered as belonging to Li-Fraumeni families.

15492269
Modulation of gene expression by tumor-derived p53 mutants
p53 mutants with a single amino acid substitution are overexpressed in a majority of human cancers containing a p53 mutation. Overexpression of the mutant protein suggests that there is a selection pressure on the cell indicative of an active functional role for mutant p53. Indeed, H1299 cells expressing mutant p53-R175H, p53-R273H or p53-D281G grow at a faster rate compared with a control cell line. Using p53-specific small interfering RNA, we show that the growth rate of mutant p53-expressing cells decreases as mutant p53 level decreases, demonstrating that the increased cellular growth is dependent on p53 expression. Increased growth rate is not observed for H1299 cell clones expressing mutant p53-D281G (L22Q/W23S), which has been shown to be defective in transactivation in transient transcriptional assays. This shows that the increased growth rate imparted by mutant p53 in H1299 cells requires the transactivation function of mutant p53. By performing microarray hybridization analyses, we show that constitutive expression of three common p53 mutants (p53-R175H, p53-R273H, and p53-D281G) in H1299 human lung carcinoma cells evokes regulation of a common set of genes, a significant number of which are involved in cell growth regulation. Predictably, H1299 cells expressing p53-D281G (L22Q/W23S) are defective in up-regulating a number of these genes. The differences in expression profiles induced by individual p53 mutants in the cells may be representative of the p53 mutants and how they can affect gene expression resulting in the observed "gain of function" phenotypes (i.e., increased growth rate, decreased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents, and so forth).

17567834
Telomere length in peripheral blood cells of germline TP53 mutation carriers is shorter than that of normal individuals of corresponding age
Background:
        
      
      A decrease in the age at cancer onset and increase in cancer incidence in successive generations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families with germline TP53 mutations have been previously described. In the current study a possible relation was analyzed between telomere length and cancer onset in TP53 mutation carriers.

18937320
Identification of a novel TP53 germline mutation in a large Italian Li-Fraumeni syndrome Family


24702488
Genetic evaluation based on family history and Her2 status correctly identifies TP53 mutations in very early onset breast cancer cases
Currently, hereditary breast cancer is being attributed to more than 20 genes of differing penetrance. Although BRCA1 and BRCA2 are still the genes of reference for breast cancer susceptibility, extreme breast cancer phenotypes may be the result of deleterious alleles of other genes. Here, we report three families with early-onset breast cancer that were initially referred for BRCA1/BRCA2 genetic testing. They were diagnosed with breast cancer at an extraordinarily early age. On the basis of their extensive family history, which included multiple cancer types, and their Her2 status, they were suspected for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Indeed, all three probands were found to harbor TP53 tumor suppressor gene mutations. These included p.C275X, described here for the first time, as well as p.R213X and p.Y220C, which have been described in the past. Our conclusion is that decisions on genetic analysis for inherited early onset breast cancer should always be based on detailed pedigree information, combined with Her2 status.

26270727
Clinical Actionability of Multigene Panel Testing for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Risk Assessment
Importance:
        
      
      The practice of genetic testing for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (HBOC) is rapidly evolving owing to the recent introduction of multigene panels. While these tests may identify 40% to 50% more individuals with hereditary cancer gene mutations than does testing for BRCA1/2 alone, whether finding such mutations will alter clinical management is unknown.

16551709
Spectrum of mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, and TP53 in families at high risk of breast cancer
Context:
        
      
      Genetic testing for inherited mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 has become integral to the care of women with a severe family history of breast or ovarian cancer, but an unknown number of patients receive negative (ie, wild-type) results when they actually carry a pathogenic BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Furthermore, other breast cancer genes generally are not evaluated.

15192123
Constitutive and DNA damage inducible activation of pig3 and MDM2 genes by tumor-derived p53 mutant C277Y
The p53 gene is compromised in most human cancers by point mutation. Evidence is accumulating that these alterations frequently do not result in a complete loss of the sequence-specific transcriptional regulatory function of p53. Here, we describe the transcriptional activity of the p53 mutant C277Y isolated from a Ewing's sarcoma with high constitutive pig3 expression. Transient transfection of this mutant into a p53 null cell line resulted in activation not only of the pig3 but also of the MDM2 gene compatible with the presence of constitutively expressed MDM2 transcripts initiated from the P2 promoter in the p53-C277Y hemizygous Ewing's sarcoma cell line. Expression of endogenous pig3 and MDM2 genes was further enhanced on irradiation of this cell line. Here, suppression of p53-C277Y by RNAi reduced pig3 promoter activity, RNA, and protein expression. Reporter gene assays revealed that the potential of p53-C277Y to up-regulate MDM2 expression was similar to wild-type p53, whereas activation of the pig3 promoter was at least 5-fold increased over wild-type p53. The pentanucleotide microsatellite sequence present in exon 1 of the pig3 gene was found to be responsible for p53-C277Y-mediated activation. In concordance with a role of PIG3 protein for cell death, we showed residual apoptotic activity of p53-C277Y to which the described Ewing's sarcoma cell line was found to be resistant. p53-C277Y has previously been reported to bind to DNA with altered sequence specificity and to be unable to activate generic p53 target genes in yeast-based functional assays. Our results, therefore, show that a p53 mutant may behave differently when tested in its authentic cellular context.

8688334
A constitutional de novo mutation in exon 8 of the p53 gene in a patient with multiple primary malignancies
We report a constitutional point mutation of codon 278 in exon 8 of the TP53 gene that has not yet been described as a germ-line mutation. A 52-year-old female developed multiple primary malignancies (liposarcoma, breast cancer, malignant histiocytoma, occult adenocarcinoma). The mutation found in her tumour and peripheral blood lymphocyte DNA is a cytosine to thymine transition at the second position of codon 278 resulting in an amino acid exchange from proline to leucine in the DNA-binding domain. Evaluation of the patient's family revealed that both of her sons were affected by the same mutation. Although the patient's mother had died already, we were able to demonstrate by polymorphic microsatellite analysis that the defective allele originated from the maternal side. As four brothers and one sister had inherited the same allele, which however was wild type, we were able to show that the mutation must have occurred in the germ cells of the patient's mother and that it may therefore be called de novo. This explains the lack of a high cancer incidence in the family history. All tumours tested showed positive immunohistochemical staining for p53. Loss of heterozygosity was found in five of seven tumours, one showing chromosome 17 monosomy.

15993273
Hereditary breast cancer syndromes in a Turkish population. Results of molecular germline analysis
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy which affects women. In 5-10% of all cases, breast cancer presents as a hereditary cancer syndrome. Since 1996, 68 families with suspicion of familial breast cancer have been referred to our department. In 5 of the 68 families (7.4%), the clinical diagnosis was hereditary breast ovarian cancer syndrome. In 17 families (25%), two or more breast cancer cases were present. Mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in these families revealed a BRCA1 mutation (185delAG) in one family. Three families (4.4%) had a diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome and germline mutations in TP53 (Lys292Ile, Pro278Ser and Pro278Thr). Breast cancer occurred in a family with hereditary nonpolyposis colon carcinoma (HNPCC; Lynch syndrome) carrying an MLH1 mutation (IVS17-3G>C). Most of our families (41 families; 60.2%) had only one case with breast cancer or cystic adenoma (or both) and did not need counseling and DNA testing. In summary, in 10 of the 68 families in our series (14.7%), a germline mutation in a breast cancer predisposing gene was detected. Our data show the importance of detailed examination of clinical data, pedigree analyses, and molecular germline diagnostics for the counseling of breast cancer cases.

33504652
Whole-exome sequencing reveals germline-mutated small cell lung cancer subtype with favorable response to DNA repair-targeted therapies
Because tobacco is a potent carcinogen, secondary causes of lung cancer are often diminished in perceived importance. To assess the extent of inherited susceptibility to small cell lung cancer (SCLC), the most lethal type of lung cancer, we sequenced germline exomes of 87 patients (77 SCLC and 10 extrapulmonary small cell) and considered 607 genes, discovering 42 deleterious variants in 35 cancer-predisposition genes among 43.7% of patients. These findings were validated in an independent cohort of 79 patients with SCLC. Loss of heterozygosity was observed in 3 of 14 (21.4%) tumors. Identification of variants influenced medical management and family member testing in nine (10.3%) patients. Unselected patients with SCLC were more likely to carry germline RAD51 paralog D (RAD51D), checkpoint kinase 1 (CHEK1), breast cancer 2 (BRCA2), and mutY DNA glycosylase (MUTYH) pathogenic variants than healthy controls. Germline genotype was significantly associated with the likelihood of a first-degree relative with cancer or lung cancer (odds ratio: 1.82, P = 0.008; and 2.60, P = 0.028), and longer recurrence-free survival after platinum-based chemotherapy (P = 0.002), independent of known prognostic factors. Treatment of a patient with relapsed SCLC and germline pathogenic mutation of BRCA1 interacting protein C-terminal helicase 1 (BRIP1), a homologous recombination-related gene, using agents synthetically lethal with homologous recombination deficiency, resulted in a notable disease response. This work demonstrates that SCLC, currently thought to result almost exclusively from tobacco exposure, may have an inherited predisposition and lays the groundwork for targeted therapies based on the genes involved.

29489754
The landscape of genomic alterations across childhood cancers
Pan-cancer analyses that examine commonalities and differences among various cancer types have emerged as a powerful way to obtain novel insights into cancer biology. Here we present a comprehensive analysis of genetic alterations in a pan-cancer cohort including 961 tumours from children, adolescents, and young adults, comprising 24 distinct molecular types of cancer. Using a standardized workflow, we identified marked differences in terms of mutation frequency and significantly mutated genes in comparison to previously analysed adult cancers. Genetic alterations in 149 putative cancer driver genes separate the tumours into two classes: small mutation and structural/copy-number variant (correlating with germline variants). Structural variants, hyperdiploidy, and chromothripsis are linked to TP53 mutation status and mutational signatures. Our data suggest that 7-8% of the children in this cohort carry an unambiguous predisposing germline variant and that nearly 50% of paediatric neoplasms harbour a potentially druggable event, which is highly relevant for the design of future clinical trials.

25927356
Identification of a comprehensive spectrum of genetic factors for hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population by next-generation sequencing
The genetic etiology of hereditary breast cancer has not been fully elucidated. Although germline mutations of high-penetrance genes such as BRCA1/2 are implicated in development of hereditary breast cancers, at least half of all breast cancer families are not linked to these genes. To identify a comprehensive spectrum of genetic factors for hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population, we performed an analysis of germline mutations in 2,165 coding exons of 152 genes associated with hereditary cancer using next-generation sequencing (NGS) in 99 breast cancer patients from families of cancer patients regardless of cancer types. Forty-two deleterious germline mutations were identified in 21 genes of 34 patients, including 18 (18.2%) BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, 3 (3%) TP53 mutations, 5 (5.1%) DNA mismatch repair gene mutations, 1 (1%) CDH1 mutation, 6 (6.1%) Fanconi anemia pathway gene mutations, and 9 (9.1%) mutations in other genes. Of seven patients who carried mutations in more than one gene, 4 were BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, and their average onset age was much younger than patients with only BRCA1/2 mutations. Almost all identified high-penetrance gene mutations in those families fulfill the typical phenotypes of hereditary cancer syndromes listed in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, except two TP53 and three mismatch repair gene mutations. Furthermore, functional studies of MSH3 germline mutations confirmed the association between MSH3 mutation and tumorigenesis, and segregation analysis suggested antagonism between BRCA1 and MSH3. We also identified a lot of low-penetrance gene mutations. Although the clinical significance of those newly identified low-penetrance gene mutations has not been fully appreciated yet, these new findings do provide valuable epidemiological information for the future studies. Together, these findings highlight the importance of genetic testing based on NCCN guidelines and a multi-gene analysis using NGS may be a supplement to traditional genetic counseling.

17572079
Rapid development of post-radiotherapy sarcoma and breast cancer in a patient with a novel germline 'de-novo' TP53 mutation
Aims:
        
      
      Germline mutations in the TP53 tumour suppressor gene are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which is characterised by a spectrum of neoplasms occurring in children and young adults that predominantly include early-onset breast cancer, a variety of sarcomas, brain tumours and adrenocortical tumours. The identification of patients carrying TP53 mutations is primarily based on a positive family history of these early-onset characteristic cancer types. The aim of this study is to emphasize the importance of TP53 molecular testing in patients with very early onset breast cancer and no family history of cancer.

25293557
Germline TP53 mutations is common in patients with two early-onset primary malignancies


15850016
Primary orbital liposarcoma in Li-Fraumeni cancer family syndrome: a case report
Aims and background:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to describe a case of primary orbital liposarcoma in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

26556299
Germline Variants in Targeted Tumor Sequencing Using Matched Normal DNA
Importance:
        
      
      Tumor genetic sequencing identifies potentially targetable genetic alterations with therapeutic implications. Analysis has concentrated on detecting tumor-specific variants, but recognition of germline variants may prove valuable as well.

27616075
Gene panel sequencing in familial breast/ovarian cancer patients identifies multiple novel mutations also in genes others than BRCA1/2
Breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC) predisposition has been attributed to a number of high- and moderate to low-penetrance susceptibility genes. With the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) simultaneous testing of these genes has become feasible. In this monocentric study, we report results of panel-based screening of 14 BC/OC susceptibility genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, RAD51D, CHEK2, PALB2, ATM, NBN, CDH1, TP53, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2) in a group of 581 consecutive individuals from a German population with BC and/or OC fulfilling diagnostic criteria for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing including 179 with a triple-negative tumor. Altogether we identified 106 deleterious mutations in 105 (18%) patients in 10 different genes, including seven different exon deletions. Of these 106 mutations, 16 (15%) were novel and only six were found in BRCA1/2. To further characterize mutations located in or nearby splicing consensus sites we performed RT-PCR analysis which allowed confirmation of pathogenicity in 7 of 9 mutations analyzed. In PALB2, we identified a deleterious variant in six cases. All but one were associated with early onset BC and a positive family history indicating that penetrance for PALB2 mutations is comparable to BRCA2. Overall, extended testing beyond BRCA1/2 identified a deleterious mutation in further 6% of patients. As a downside, 89 variants of uncertain significance were identified highlighting the need for comprehensive variant databases. In conclusion, panel testing yields more accurate information on genetic cancer risk than assessing BRCA1/2 alone and wide-spread testing will help improve penetrance assessment of variants in these risk genes.

19012332
Somatic TP53 mutation mosaicism in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
We present a girl who developed adrenocortical adenoma at the age of 1 year and osteosarcoma at the age of 5 years. There was no history of cancer in her parents and their relatives. However, both tumors were typical for the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), and the patient met criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. A mutation in codon 282 (Arg282Trp) was identified in her blood lymphocyte genomic DNA. The substitution was found in neither of her parents, which indicated a possibility of a de novo mutation. Unexpectedly, sequencing of the DNA of the patient repeatedly showed allelic imbalance in favor of the normal allele. This observation prompted us to investigate the putative somatic mosaicism in the patient consisting of normal cells and cells heterozygous for the mutation. The imbalance was also examined in two other non-invasively sampled tissues, buccal cells, and cells from the urine sediment, and sequencing was confirmed with two other independent methods. While the findings in blood and the urine sediment were similar, in buccal cells both alleles were present in equal amounts. The allele ratio in lymphocytes was consistent with a mosaic where about 2/3 of cells carried two normal alleles and only 1/3 was heterozygous for the mutation. Despite the mosaicism the girl developed two early childhood tumors of mesodermal origin, and her phenotype was thus not milder than that of other germline TP53 mutation carriers. To our knowledge this is the first description of somatic mosaicism for a de novo TP53 mutation in LFS.

15173255
Germline mutations of the E-cadherin(CDH1) and TP53 genes, rather than of RUNX3 and HPP1, contribute to genetic predisposition in German gastric cancer patients


12019170
Initiation of human astrocytoma by clonal evolution of cells with progressive loss of p53 functions in a patient with a 283H TP53 germ-line mutation: evidence for a precursor lesion
Little is known about the genetic and molecular events leading to the early stages of human astrocytoma formation. To examine this issue, we analyzed the significance of sequential accumulation of two somatic point mutations (R267W and E258D) in the TP53 gene during the initiation of astrocytoma in a patient born with a single germ-line p53 point mutation (R283H). We adapted a p53 transcriptional assay in yeast to establish the temporal occurrence and allelic distribution of the p53 mutations present in the patient and characterized these mutations through functional assays and structural modeling. Our results show that the first somatic mutation occurred at codon 267 on the p53 allele harboring the germ-line mutation R283H, whereas the second somatic mutation occurred in the remaining wild-type (wt) allele at codon 258. These two mutations induced the formation of tumor cells with the genotype p53(267W+283H/258D), which comprised 70% of the cells in the primary WHO grade II astrocytoma. Another 8% of cells within the tumor had the partially mutated genotype p53(267W+283H/WT) and represented the remnants of a clinically undetectable intermediate stage of astrocytic neoplastic transformation. The remaining 22% of cells had the constitutive p53(283H/WT) genotype and likely consisted of nontumor cells. Functional analysis of the p53 alleles present in the patient's tumor indicated that the germ-line p53(R283H) could transactivate the CDKN1A((p21, WAF1, cip1, SDI1)) but not the BAX gene and retained the ability to induce growth arrest of human glioblastoma cells. The p53(R267W+R283H) and p53(E258D) were incapable of transactivating either promoter or inducing growth arrest. Modeling of p53 interaction with DNA suggests that R283H mutation may weaken the sequence-specific interaction of p53 lysine 120 with the BAX gene but not the CDKN1A p53-responsive elements. Taken together, these results have characterized, for the first time, the genetic events defining a clinically undetectable precursor lesion leading to a grade II astrocytoma. They also suggest that astrocytoma initiation in this patient resulted from monoclonal evolution driven by a sequential loss of proapoptotic and growth arrest functions of p53.

30309722
Patients with BRCA mutations have superior outcomes after intraperitoneal chemotherapy in optimally resected high grade ovarian cancer
Objectives:
        
      
      To compare the outcomes after intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy in patients with and without pathogenic BRCA mutations.

26086041
Germline TP53 Mutations in Patients With Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer in the Colon Cancer Family Registry
Importance:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome, usually characterized by germline TP53 mutations, is associated with markedly elevated lifetime risks of multiple cancers, and has been linked to an increased risk of early-onset colorectal cancer.

29205322
A targeted sequencing panel identifies rare damaging variants in multiple genes in the cranial neural tube defect, anencephaly
Neural tube defects (NTDs) affecting the brain (anencephaly) are lethal before or at birth, whereas lower spinal defects (spina bifida) may lead to lifelong neurological handicap. Collectively, NTDs rank among the most common birth defects worldwide. This study focuses on anencephaly, which despite having a similar frequency to spina bifida and being the most common type of NTD observed in mouse models, has had more limited inclusion in genetic studies. A genetic influence is strongly implicated in determining risk of NTDs and a molecular diagnosis is of fundamental importance to families both in terms of understanding the origin of the condition and for managing future pregnancies. Here we used a custom panel of 191 NTD candidate genes to screen 90 patients with cranial NTDs (n = 85 anencephaly and n = 5 craniorachischisis) with a targeted exome sequencing platform. After filtering and comparing to our in-house control exome database (N = 509), we identified 397 rare variants (minor allele frequency, MAF < 1%), 21 of which were previously unreported and predicted damaging. This included 1 frameshift (PDGFRA), 2 stop-gained (MAT1A; NOS2) and 18 missense variations. Together with evidence for oligogenic inheritance, this study provides new information on the possible genetic causation of anencephaly.

10697617
Two cases of osteosarcoma occurring as second malignancy of childhood cancer
We report on two patients in whom osteosarcoma occurred as second malignancy of childhood cancer. One patient had a malignant teratoma and the other adrenocortical carcinoma as the primary cancer. The emergence of cancer in cured cases and long-term survival cases of childhood cancer may result in an increase in the number of osteosarcomas seen in adolescence occurring as second malignancy. Anti-cancer drugs in large does were used for the treatment of a malignant teratoma in the former. These anti-cancer drugs may be involved in the occurrence of the second malignancy. In the latter, the patient has the germ-line mutation of p53 tumor suppressor gene, so genetic factors are presumably related to the occurrence of the second malignancy.

18762572
Identification of a novel TP53 germline mutation E285V in a rare case of paediatric adrenocortical carcinoma and choroid plexus carcinoma
Paediatric choroid plexus carcinomas (CPC) and adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) are exceedingly rare tumours, each occurring at an annual rate of 0.3 cases per million children or less. Although both tumour types are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), the penetrance of germline TP53 mutations in CPC remains to be established. We report here a young boy without a family history of cancer who presented with CPC and subsequently ACC. Genetic testing revealed a novel de novo germline TP53 mutation (E285V). Neither tumour underwent loss of heterozygosity. Consistent with this observation, functional analyses demonstrated that E285V acts as a dominant negative mutant that is defective in regulating target gene expression, growth suppression and apoptosis. These results further strengthen the association between germline TP53 mutations and childhood CPC, even when occurring in the absence of familial tumour susceptibility.

1569604
Detection of novel germ-line p53 mutations in diverse-cancer-prone families identified by selecting patients with childhood adrenocortical carcinoma
Background:
        
      
      Germ-line p53 mutations appear to be inherited among the members of families diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). The mutations detected in those families to date have been clustered in exon 7 of the p53 gene and, typically, have been single-base substitutions resulting in amino acid changes.

22878818
Chest wall leiomyosarcoma after breast-conservative therapy for early-stage breast cancer in a young woman with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is one of the most penetrant forms of familial cancer susceptibility syndromes, characterized by early age at tumor onset and a wide spectrum of malignant tumors. Identifying LFS in patients with cancer is clinically imperative because they have an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation and are more likely to develop radiation-induced secondary malignancies. This case report describes a young woman whose initial presentation of LFS was early-onset breast cancer and whose treatment of this primary malignancy with breast conservation likely resulted in a secondary malignancy arising in her radiation field. As seen in this case, most breast cancers in patients with LFS exhibit a triple-positive phenotype (estrogen receptor-positive/progesterone receptor-positive/HER2-positive). Although this patient met classic LFS criteria based on age and personal and family history of cancer, the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology for Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian Cancer endorse genetic screening for TP53 mutations in a subset of patients with early-onset breast cancer, even in the absence of a suggestive family history, because of the potential for de novo TP53 mutations.

15368100
A TP53-truncating germline mutation (E287X) in a family with characteristics of both hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Mutations in CDH1, which encodes E-cadherin, have been associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) in Western populations but have not been shown to play a major role in Asians. Recently, a patient with familial gastric cancer (FGC) was shown to harbor a germline mutation in the TP53 gene, which encodes p53 and has been previously associated with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS). To determine whether mutations in TP53 are associated with FGC in Asians, we screened the entire coding region of TP53 in probands from 23 Korean FGC families. We identified a nonsense (E287X) TP53 germline mutation in a family whose history is compatible with both HDGC and LFS. Two members of this family (SNU-G2) were afflicted with brain tumors, seven with gastric cancers, two with sarcomas, and one with both gastric cancer and a sarcoma. The E287X TP53 mutation segregated with the cancer phenotype in the family members from whom DNA samples were available. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a large family with both HDGC and LFS. Our results suggest that TP53 mutational screening in FGC families should be interpreted with caution because additional TP53 mutation-carrying HDGC families may also show LFS-related phenotypes.

27374712
Germline TP53 Mutation and Clinical Characteristics of Korean Patients With Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Little is known of the mutation and tumor spectrum of Korean patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Owing to the rarity of LFS, few cases have been reported in Korea thus far. This study aimed to retrospectively review the mutations and clinical characteristics of Korean patients with LFS.

28502725
Molecular Diagnosis of Mosaic Overgrowth Syndromes Using a Custom-Designed Next-Generation Sequencing Panel
Recent studies have discovered a group of overgrowth syndromes, such as congenital lipomatous overgrowth with vascular, epidermal, and skeletal anomalies (CLOVES) syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria (MCAP) syndrome, are caused by somatic activating variants in genes involved in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mechanistic target of rapamycin pathway. Because of the low-abundance nature of these variants, Sanger sequencing often yields negative results. We have developed and validated a next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel that targets all known variants associated with these syndromes. Fifty cases, including two prenatal cases, were tested using the panel. A pathogenic variant in the PIK3CA, PIK3R2, or AKT1 gene was identified in 28 of the 50 cases with the variant allele frequencies ranging from 1.0% to 49.2%. These variants were only present in the affected tissues in most of the cases, demonstrating a causal role in the development of these diseases. In vitro cell culture showed significant enrichment of the cells harboring variant alleles, suggesting that these variants render growth advantages to mutant cells. Phenotype-genotype correlation analysis showed PIK3CA mutation hotspots at residues E542, E545, and H1047 are often associated with CLOVES syndrome, whereas PIK3CA G914R is preferentially related to MCAP. We thus demonstrate that NGS technology is highly sensitive for detecting low-level mosaicism and can facilitate clinical diagnosis of mosaic overgrowth syndromes in both prenatal and postnatal settings.

10435620
p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.

16437140
Acute myelogenous leukemia in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome treated with valproic acid, theophyllamine and all-trans retinoic acid: a case report


10484981
Hereditary TP53 codon 292 and somatic P16INK4A codon 94 mutations in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder that is characterized by various types of cancer in childhood and adult cases. Although hereditary TP53 mutation is very rare in different human cancers, it has been frequently reported in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. On the other hand, hereditary mutations of TP57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A, which affect the cell cycle similar to TP53, were observed in some types of cancer. In a Turkish family with the diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, we analyzed the mutation pattern of TP53, P57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A in the peripheral blood, and loss of heterozygosity (homo/hemizygous deletion) pattern of TP53 and P15INK4B/P16INK4A in two tumor tissues. The propositus had a seminoma, his daughter a medulloblastoma, and one of his healthy cousins, a TP53 codon 292 missense point mutation (AAA-->ATA; Lys-->Ile) in the peripheral blood cells. Tumor tissue obtained from the propositus with the seminoma revealed loss of heterozygosity in the TP53 gene. In the analyses of tumor tissues from the propositus and his daughter, a P16INK4A codon 94 missense point mutation (GCG-->GAG; Ala-->Glu) was observed with the hereditary TP53 mutation. P16INK4A codon 94 mutation observed in our family is a novel mutation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. No other gene alteration in TP53, P57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A was observed. Existence of the P16INK4A mutation and the hereditary TP53 mutation with or without loss of heterozygosity in the TP53 gene (seminoma/medulloblastoma) may be evidence for a common mechanism involved in tumorogenesis. The gene alterations in TP53 and P16INK4A genes may be used as tumor markers in our family.

24251760
Spitzoid melanoma in a child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Spitzoid melanoma of childhood is a rare malignancy. The histological features are at the upper end of a range encompassing Spitz nevus and atypical Spitz tumor, the unifying features including large oval, fusiform or polygonal melanocytes with abundant homogeneous-appearing cytoplasma and large vesicular nuclei. The presence of a "bottom-heavy" pattern, strikingly enlarged nuclei and nucleoli in both the upper and lower portions of the lesion, and deep mitotic figures are among the findings that distinguish most of the Spitzoid melanomas from Spitz nevi and atypical Spitz tumors. There are no syndromic associations reported for this malignancy. We report the occurrence of choroid plexus carcinoma, Spitzoid melanoma, and myelodysplasia in a child who was found to carry a germline mutation for TP53. While choroid plexus carcinoma and myelodysplasia have relatively frequently been described, melanomas have been very rarely described in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The association of Spitzoid melanoma with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, especially in a pediatric patient, has not been reported before.

12610779
Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk
To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.

22311583
Prevalence of TP53 germ line mutations in young Pakistani breast cancer patients
Women from Pakistan and India are more often diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer than Caucasian women. Given that only 12% of Pakistani women diagnosed with breast cancer at or before 30 years of age have previously been shown to harbor germ line mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2, the genetic causes of the majority of early-onset cases are unexplained. Since germ line mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 predispose women to early-onset breast cancer, we assessed the prevalence of TP53 mutations in 105 early-onset breast cancer patients from Pakistan, who had previously been found to be negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ line mutations. The patient group included 67 women diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer at or before age 30 with no family history of breast or ovarian cancer (EO30NFH group) and 38 women diagnosed with breast cancer at or before age 40 with one or more first- or second-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer (EO40FH group). Mutation analysis of the complete TP53 coding region was performed using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography analysis, followed by DNA sequencing of variant fragments. One deleterious mutation, c.499-500delCA in exon 5, was identified in the 105 breast cancer patients (1%). This mutation is novel in the germ line and has not been described in other populations. It was detected in a 28-year-old patient with no family history of breast or ovarian cancer. This mutation is rare as it was not detected in additional 157 recently recruited non-BRCA1 and non-BRCA2-associated early-onset breast cancer patients. Our findings show that TP53 mutations may account for a minimal portion of early-onset breast cancer in Pakistan.

19930417
Beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 wild-type breast and/or ovarian cancer families: germline mutations in TP53 and PTEN


15784129
A chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case with del (12) (p12) in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a familial cancer syndrome characterized by different tumors and hereditary p53 mutations. Here, a chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family with del (12) (p12) cytogenetic abnormality was presented. A hereditary p53 mutation (pro309ser) supported the Li-Fraumeni syndrome diagnosis in this family. This syndrome was characterized by the clonal myeloproliferative accumulation in bone marrow and peripheral blood with negative bcr/abl gene rearrangement finding. The etiology of this rare syndrome is still unclear. This is the only chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case reported in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. Del (12)(p12) was observed in leukemias except chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome. The deletion in chromosome 12p12 with hereditary p53 mutation should have a critical role in chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome etiology in our case.

27449771
Multiple rare variants in high-risk pancreatic cancer-related genes may increase risk for pancreatic cancer in a subset of patients with and without germline CDKN2A mutations
The risk of pancreatic cancer (PC) is increased in melanoma-prone families but the causal relationship between germline CDKN2A mutations and PC risk is uncertain, suggesting the existence of non-CDKN2A factors. One genetic possibility involves patients having mutations in multiple high-risk PC-related genes; however, no systematic examination has yet been conducted. We used next-generation sequencing data to examine 24 putative PC-related genes in 43 PC patients with and 23 PC patients without germline CDKN2A mutations and 1001 controls. For each gene and the four pathways in which they occurred, we tested whether PC patients (overall or CDKN2A+ and CDKN2A- cases separately) had an increased number of rare nonsynonymous variants. Overall, we identified 35 missense variants in PC patients, 14 in CDKN2A+ and 21 in CDKN2A- PC cases. We found nominally significant associations for mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) in all PC patients and for ATM, CPA1, and PMS2 in CDKN2A- PC patients. Further, nine CDKN2A+ and four CDKN2A- PC patients had rare potentially deleterious variants in multiple PC-related genes. Loss-of-function variants were only observed in CDKN2A- PC patients, with ATM having the most pathogenic variants. Also, ATM variants (n = 5) were only observed in CDKN2A- PC patients with a family history that included digestive system tumors. Our results suggest that a subset of PC patients may have increased risk because of germline mutations in multiple PC-related genes.

31567591
Targeted germline sequencing of patients with three or more primary melanomas reveals high rate of pathogenic variants
Individuals with multiple primary melanomas have rates of germline CDKN2A pathogenic variants of 3%-18%, and are also frequent carriers of variants in the melanocortin-1 receptor. Few patients with numerous (≥3) primary melanomas have been studied with respect to these or other potential germline pathogenic variants. We investigated 46 patients with ≥3 primary melanomas (3, n = 17; 4, n = 14; 5-14, n = 15) to determine if higher rates of germline pathogenic variants of CDKN2A, MC1R, or other cancer genes could explain their extreme melanoma phenotype. Most (43/46, 93%) patients had variants in MC1R and 11/46 (24%) had CDKN2A pathogenic variants, but only male sex and having two variants in MC1R correlated with increasing number of melanomas. Panel screening of 56 other cancer predisposition genes did not reveal other germline pathogenic variants associated with melanoma (CDK4, BAP1, POT1), although pathogenic variants in TP53, CHEK2, and BRCA2 were present in three separate patients and some patients had variants of uncertain significance. In summary, targeted germline sequencing of patients with ≥3 primary melanomas revealed a high rate of pathogenic variants in CDKN2A and other known cancer genes. Although further investigation of these pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain significance is needed, these results support cancer gene panel testing in individuals diagnosed with ≥3 melanomas.

24448499
Integrated analysis of germline and somatic variants in ovarian cancer
We report the first large-scale exome-wide analysis of the combined germline-somatic landscape in ovarian cancer. Here we analyse germline and somatic alterations in 429 ovarian carcinoma cases and 557 controls. We identify 3,635 high confidence, rare truncation and 22,953 missense variants with predicted functional impact. We find germline truncation variants and large deletions across Fanconi pathway genes in 20% of cases. Enrichment of rare truncations is shown in BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2. In addition, we observe germline truncation variants in genes not previously associated with ovarian cancer susceptibility (NF1, MAP3K4, CDKN2B and MLL3). Evidence for loss of heterozygosity was found in 100 and 76% of cases with germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 truncations, respectively. Germline-somatic interaction analysis combined with extensive bioinformatics annotation identifies 222 candidate functional germline truncation and missense variants, including two pathogenic BRCA1 and 1 TP53 deleterious variants. Finally, integrated analyses of germline and somatic variants identify significantly altered pathways, including the Fanconi, MAPK and MLL pathways.

15073606
Multifocal intrafollicular granulosa cell tumor of the ovary associated with an unusual germline p53 mutation
A 23-year-old woman presented with a 7 cm right multicystic mass in the ovary, which corresponded microscopically to an unusual lesion consisting of a multifocal granulosa cell tumor with intrafollicular ('in situ') growth involving two-thirds of mature follicles. Stromal invasion was found in only one area where neoplastic follicles coalesced. Granulosa cells had atypical, bizarre TP53 positive nuclei with hyperchromatism, abundant mitoses and numerous hyaline globules. The contralateral ovary was normal. From the age of 10 years, the patient had a complex medical history of multiple tumors, including telangiectatic osteosarcoma, typical and malignant phyllodes tumor, reticulohistiocytoma of skin, carcinomas of the breast and lipo- and leiomyosarcoma. The female genital tract also harbored myometrial leiomyomas and an early endometrial carcinoma. Retrospective histologic study of all mesenchymal neoplasms in this patient showed, the conspicuous presence of similar bizarre TP53 positive cells with hyaline globules in all the mesenchymal neoplasms. In the genetic study, a germline p53 gene mutation was detected in exon 10, codon 336, generating a stop codon in the oligomerization domain of the protein (E336X). A further p53 mutation was found in exon 7 in the granulosa cell tumor. Mutation occurred de novo since there was no history of tumors in any family members, all of whom had a wild-type p53. Although this patient shows a typical tumor phenotype of Li Fraumeni syndrome, the germline mutation corresponded to a highly unusual mutated domain, which is similar to the one found in childhood malignant adrenocortical tumor; also a rare neoplasm that originates in adrenocortical cells; which are closely related, both functionally and embryologically, to granulosa cells.

9150393
Two functional assays employed to detect an unusual mutation in the oligomerisation domain of p53 in a Li-Fraumeni like family
Previous investigations of a Li - Fraumeni like family (Barnes et al., 1992) demonstrated that both the proband and her mother had elevated p53 protein levels in both tumour tissue and normal tissue at sites distant from the tumour, although no mutation was found in the p53 gene. In the present study two recently described functional assays for p53, an apoptotic assay and the functional assay for the separation of alleles in yeast (FASAY), have been employed to study the functional activity of p53 from this patient. The results of the apoptotic assay demonstrated that this patient had a p53 functional defect and the FASAY result suggested that this defect was in fact a germline mutation of the p53 gene. A point mutation of codon 337, which results in an amino acid substitution of a cysteine for an arginine, was demonstrated initially in cDNA and was confirmed by sequencing of genomic DNA. This is an unusual mutation as it is in the oligomerisation domain of p53, in contrast to the majority of p53 mutations which are in the core DNA binding domain. This mutation results in a protein which still retains partial transactivational activity in the FASAY. The mutation of codon 337 is only the second reported case of a germline missense mutation occurring in the oligomerisation domain of p53.

9704931
Characterization of the oligomerization defects of two p53 mutants found in families with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome
Recently two germline mutations in the oligomerization domain of p53 have been identified in patients with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like Syndromes. We have used biophysical and biochemical methods to characterize these two mutants in order to better understand their functional defects and the role of the p53 oligomerization domain (residues 325-355) in oncogenesis. We find that residues 310-360 of the L344P mutant are monomeric, apparently unfolded and cannot interact with wild-type (WT) p53. The full length L344P protein is unable to bind sequence specifically to DNA and is therefore an inactive, but not a dominant negative mutant. R337C, on the other hand, can form dimers and tetramers, can hetero-oligomerize with WTp53 and can bind to a p53 consensus element. However, the thermal stability of R337C is much lower than that of WTp53 and at physiological temperatures more than half of this mutant is less than tetrameric. Thus, the R337C mutant retains some functional activity yet leads to a predisposition to cancer, suggesting that even partial inactivation of p53 oligomerization is sufficient for accelerated tumour progression.

11753428
A novel mechanism of tumorigenesis involving pH-dependent destabilization of a mutant p53 tetramer
The p53 tumor suppressor requires tetramerization to function as an initiator of cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. Children in southern Brazil that exhibit an elevated incidence of adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) harbor an Arg 337 to His mutation within the tetramerization domain of p53 (p53-R337H; 35 of 36 patients). The mutant tetramerization domain (p53tet-R337H) adopts a native-like fold but is less stable than the wild type domain (p53tet-wt). Furthermore, the stability of p53tet-R337H is highly sensitive to pH in the physiological range; this sensitivity correlates with the protonation state of the mutated His 337. These results demonstrate a pH-sensitive molecular defect of p53 (R337H), suggesting that pH-dependent p53 dysfunction is the molecular basis for these cases of ACC in Brazilian children.

16033918
Penetrance of adrenocortical tumours associated with the germline TP53 R337H mutation
Background:
        
      
      An inherited germline P53 mutation has been identified in cases of childhood adrenocortical carcinoma (ACT), a neoplasm with a high incidence in southern Brazil. The penetrance of ACT in carriers of the point mutation, which encodes an arginine-to-histidine substitution at codon 337 of TP53 (R337H), has not been determined.

20426520
Li-Fraumeni syndrome in a Turkish family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is one of the familial cancers characterized by different tumors and hereditary TP53 mutations. The adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) association with acute leukemia is unusual in childhood, even in LFS. The authors here present a family with pR337P mutation in TP53 gene who had a child with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and associated adrenocortical carcinoma as a case 1 and his cousin with brain tumor as a case 2. A hereditary TP53 mutation supported the diagnosis of LFS in this family. The patients had many difficulties in treatment strategies and succumbed to death. The availability of a reliable molecular marker to detect the R337P TP53 mutation allows the rapid identification of carriers in families that have a child with ACC. Once identified, carriers could be screened for early detection of ACC by imaging and endocrine studies and should be given psychological support to prevent anxiety for death. Whether early detection of ACC will reduce the mortality in these patients remains to be determined.

28573494
A novel TP53 germline inframe deletion identified in a Spanish series of Li-fraumeni syndrome suspected families
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant, inherited tumor predisposition syndrome associated with heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. The molecular diagnosis of LFS is important to develop strategies for early detection and access to the genetic counseling. Our study evaluated germline TP53 mutations in Spanish families with a history suggestive of LFS. Germline TP53 alterations in 22 families with a history suggestive of LFS were evaluated by Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Loss of heterozygosity analysis and immunohistochemistry of the protein in the tumor were performed in order to evaluate the pathogenicity of a novel alteration detected. A total of seven TP53 mutations were detected, six point mutations (4 missense and 2 nonsense) and a novel inframe deletion. 93% of mutation carriers developed at least one malignancy (mainly breast cancer and sarcomas), with a mean age at diagnosis of the first tumor of 30.2 years. Two missense mutations acted as dominant-negative. The novel inframe mutation c.437_445del was located in the DNA-binding domain. This mutation segregated with cancer in the family, and both high expression of the protein and loss of the wild-type TP53 allele were detected in the tumor of the carrier. We have found a novel inframe deletion in TP53 that likely results in the loss of p53 function and acts in a non-dominant negative way, although further studies are necessary to clarify this issue. The identification of novel TP53 alterations is crucial for a personalized cancer-risk management of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

19714490
p53 Tetramerization domain mutations: germline R342X and R342P, and somatic R337G identified in pediatric patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and a child with adrenocortical carcinoma
Germline p53 mutations are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and other familial cancer phenotypes not fulfilling the definition for LFS. The majority of germline p53 mutations cluster in exons 5-8, corresponding to a DNA binding domain. We report the identification of two germline mutations and a somatic mutation in a tetramerization domain (TD), a rare site for mutations. The germline mutation, R342X (16915C>T), and the novel mutation, R342P (16916G>C), were found in a child with adrenocortical carcinoma and in a LFS pediatric patient with multiple primaries. The novel somatic mutation, R337G (16900C>G), was discovered in myelodysplastic syndrome with transformation to acute myeloblastic leukemia, developing as the third primary in the LFS child. These findings add further information on p53 TD mutations and TD contribution to tumorigenesis.

10064694
p53 mutants without a functional tetramerisation domain are not oncogenic
p53 is altered in about 50 % of cancers. Most of the p53 mutants have lost the wild-type tumour suppressor activity but show oncogenic properties. The majority of the p53 alterations are missense mutations of residues located in its DNA binding domain (DBD). Only a few mutations concern residues in its tetramerisation domain (TD). However, the study of mutant proteins identified in tumors that do not form tetramers has shown that they have lost the wild-type activity like most of the p53 DBD mutants. Here, we show that two of such mutant proteins, Arg342Pro and Leu344Pro are not dominant negative and do not stimulate the expression of a reporter gene under the control of the multi-drug resistance gene-1 (MDR-1). This suggests that to be oncogenic, p53 mutants need to form tetramers. Accordingly, the dominant negative effect and the ability of a tetrameric mutant protein, Asp281Gly, to stimulate the MDR-1 promoter are abolished when its TD is rendered non-functional by the mutation of leucine 344 to a proline residue. These results suggest that mutations in the TD, are less selected in tumors than mutations in the DBD because they do not lead to oncogenic proteins.

25226867
Further evidence for pathogenicity of the TP53 tetramerization domain mutation p.Arg342Pro in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare genetic disease with a highly significant predisposition to multiple early-onset neoplasms. These neoplasms include adrenocortical carcinoma, sarcoma, leukemia and CNS tumors in children and sarcoma, breast cancer and lung cancer in adults. LFS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In most patients germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 are found. As the majority of known mutations affect the DNA-binding domain of the p53 protein, there are only a few case reports showing the clinical presentation of mutations outside of this mutational hotspot. Here we present a family with a typical LFS pedigree with patients suffering from early-onset lung cancer, bilateral breast cancer and osteosarcoma. TP53 sequence analysis of the index patient revealed the germline mutation c.1025G > C in a heterozygous state, resulting in an amino acid exchange from arginine to proline (p.Arg342Pro) in the tetramerization domain of p53. Using DNA from an old bedside blood typing test, the same mutation was found in the mother of the index patient, who had died of breast cancer 29 years ago. In conclusion, we provide evidence for the co-segregation of a TP53 tetramerization domain mutation and cancer phenotypes, but also report pre-symptomatic mutation carriers within the family. We review published recommendations for clinical management and surveillance of high-risk members in Li-Fraumeni kindreds.

21665182
Increased sperm aneuploidy in two male carriers of germline TP53 mutations
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a broad spectrum of tumors. The disorder is caused by germline mutations in the TP53 gene. We studied chromosomes in the sperm of two male carriers of TP53 mutations. We observed increased sperm aneuploidy, mainly concerning the gonosomes when compared to four normal male controls. This observation may correlate with the involvement of the p53 protein in spermatogenesis, with its role in aneuploidy in cancer, and with the occurrence of two cases of Turner syndrome in families with germline TP53 mutations reported in the literature.

8649785
A previously undescribed mutation within the tetramerisation domain of TP53 in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
We report details of a family with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome in which there is a mutation in codon 344 of the tumour suppressor gene TP53. Codon 344 is a key residue within the tetramerisation domain, and the amino acid substitution of a proline for a leucine is predicted to have profound implications for tetramerisation and potentially DNA binding. This is the first report of a mutation at this residue in either sporadic tumours or in the germline and the first report of a germline mutation within the tetramerisation domain. The family does not appear to be remarkable in the spectrum of tumours, and there is loss of the wild-type allele in a leiomyosarcoma from the proband. A cell line has been established from the tumour of the proband and cytogenetic and molecular studies carried out, providing an extensive analysis in this family.

17656254
Tumor genomic profiling and TP53 germline mutation analysis of first-degree relative familial gliomas
About 5% of gliomas occur in a familial context, which suggests a genetic origin, but the predisposing molecular factors remain unknown in most cases. A series of nine familial gliomas were characterized with 1-megabase resolution BAC array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) together with germline sequence analysis of TP53. This series was compared with a literature series of familial gliomas and a personal series of sporadic gliomas, analyzed by chromosome CGH and aCGH, respectively. No significant difference was noted between the three populations in terms of clinical characteristics, pathologic features, and the most frequent chromosomal alterations, including loss of 1p, 10p, 10q, 13q, and 19q, and gain of 7p, 7q, 16p, 18q, 19p, 19q, 20p, and 22q. However, a genomic region located in 6q was more frequently gained in our series of familial as compared to sporadic gliomas (P=0.028). A germline TP53 mutation was observed in 1/9 cases, which suggests Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Interestingly, the Pro allele in the codon 72 of TP53 was observed in 5/9 tumors. Although familial and sporadic gliomas share very similar cytogenetic quantitative patterns, aCGH is a promising technique for the detection of small genomic differences of potential significance.

29146883
A landscape of germ line mutations in a cohort of inherited bone marrow failure patients
Bone marrow (BM) failure (BMF) in children and young adults is often suspected to be inherited, but in many cases diagnosis remains uncertain. We studied a cohort of 179 patients (from 173 families) with BMF of suspected inherited origin but unresolved diagnosis after medical evaluation and Fanconi anemia exclusion. All patients had cytopenias, and 12.0% presented ≥5% BM blast cells. Median age at genetic evaluation was 11 years; 20.7% of patients were aged ≤2 years and 36.9% were ≥18 years. We analyzed genomic DNA from skin fibroblasts using whole-exome sequencing, and were able to assign a causal or likely causal germ line mutation in 86 patients (48.0%), involving a total of 28 genes. These included genes in familial hematopoietic disorders (GATA2, RUNX1), telomeropathies (TERC, TERT, RTEL1), ribosome disorders (SBDS, DNAJC21, RPL5), and DNA repair deficiency (LIG4). Many patients had an atypical presentation, and the mutated gene was often not clinically suspected. We also found mutations in genes seldom reported in inherited BMF (IBMF), such as SAMD9 and SAMD9L (N = 16 of the 86 patients, 18.6%), MECOM/EVI1 (N = 6, 7.0%), and ERCC6L2 (N = 7, 8.1%), each of which was associated with a distinct natural history; SAMD9 and SAMD9L patients often experienced transient aplasia and monosomy 7, whereas MECOM patients presented early-onset severe aplastic anemia, and ERCC6L2 patients, mild pancytopenia with myelodysplasia. This study broadens the molecular and clinical portrait of IBMF syndromes and sheds light on newly recognized disease entities. Using a high-throughput sequencing screen to implement precision medicine at diagnosis can improve patient management and family counseling.

10980596
Novel p53 splice site mutations in three families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene predispose to a variety of cancers in families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Most germline p53 mutations observed to date cause amino acid substitutions in the protein's central sequence-specific DNA binding domain. Outside this conserved core region, however, we found novel alterations in sequences that regulate precursor mRNA splicing in three Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. Two splice site mutations affected the consensus sequence at the splice donor sites of introns 1 and 9, and produced unstable variant transcripts in normal cells. A third mutation at the splice acceptor site of intron 9 generated splicing at a cryptic acceptor site in intron 9. These splice site alterations emphasize the need to examine both noncoding and untranslated regions of the p53 gene for germline mutations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4230 - 4235

26332594
Identification of Medically Actionable Secondary Findings in the 1000 Genomes
The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommends that clinical sequencing laboratories return secondary findings in 56 genes associated with medically actionable conditions. Our goal was to apply a systematic, stringent approach consistent with clinical standards to estimate the prevalence of pathogenic variants associated with such conditions using a diverse sequencing reference sample. Candidate variants in the 56 ACMG genes were selected from Phase 1 of the 1000 Genomes dataset, which contains sequencing information on 1,092 unrelated individuals from across the world. These variants were filtered using the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) Professional version and defined parameters, appraised through literature review, and examined by a clinical laboratory specialist and expert physician. Over 70,000 genetic variants were extracted from the 56 genes, and filtering identified 237 variants annotated as disease causing by HGMD Professional. Literature review and expert evaluation determined that 7 of these variants were pathogenic or likely pathogenic. Furthermore, 5 additional truncating variants not listed as disease causing in HGMD Professional were identified as likely pathogenic. These 12 secondary findings are associated with diseases that could inform medical follow-up, including cancer predisposition syndromes, cardiac conditions, and familial hypercholesterolemia. The majority of the identified medically actionable findings were in individuals from the European (5/379) and Americas (4/181) ancestry groups, with fewer findings in Asian (2/286) and African (1/246) ancestry groups. Our results suggest that medically relevant secondary findings can be identified in approximately 1% (12/1092) of individuals in a diverse reference sample. As clinical sequencing laboratories continue to implement the ACMG recommendations, our results highlight that at least a small number of potentially important secondary findings can be selected for return. Our results also confirm that understudied populations will not reap proportionate benefits of genomic medicine, highlighting the need for continued research efforts on genetic diseases in these populations.

11420676
Characterization of germline TP53 splicing mutations and their genetic and functional analysis
Germline TP53 splicing mutations have been described infrequently (>2%) in the literature, however in a series of 40 patients and families identified by our group in which there are germline TP53 mutations, seven affect splicing (18%). The low figure reported in the literature might reflect the method of mutation detection, which in many studies does not include all splice junctions. These data indicate that a significant proportion of TP53 germline mutations are currently unrecognized. We have carried out detailed studies of the effects of the different mutations on splicing, and see distinct variations in the effects of the same mutation in different patients. Furthermore we have identified the usage of a non-consensus splice donor site in four families with an intron 4 splice donor mutation.

27157322
Detection of Germline Mutation in Hereditary Breast and/or Ovarian Cancers by Next-Generation Sequencing on a Four-Gene Panel
Mutation in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes accounts for 20% of familial breast cancers, 5% to 10% of which may be due to other less penetrant genes which are still incompletely studied. Herein, a four-gene panel was used to examine the prevalence of BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, and PTEN in hereditary breast and ovarian cancers in Southern Chinese population. In this cohort, 948 high-risk breast and/or ovarian patients were recruited for genetic screening by next-generation sequencing (NGS). The performance of our NGS pipeline was evaluated with 80 Sanger-validated known mutations and eight negative cases. With appropriate bioinformatics analysis pipeline, the detection sensitivity of NGS is comparable with Sanger sequencing. The prevalence of BRCA1/BRCA2 germline mutations was 9.4% in our Chinese cohort, of which 48.8% of the mutations arose from hotspot mutations. With the use of a tailor-made algorithm, HomopolymerQZ, more mutations were detected compared with single mutation detection algorithm. The frequencies of PTEN and TP53 were 0.21% and 0.53%, respectively, in the Southern Chinese patients with breast and/or ovarian cancers. High-throughput NGS approach allows the incorporation of control cohort that provides an ethnicity-specific data for polymorphic variants. Our data suggest that hotspot mutations screening such as SNaPshot could be an effective preliminary screening alternative adopted in a standard clinical laboratory without NGS setup.

1467311
Germ-line splicing mutation of the p53 gene in a cancer-prone family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant susceptibility to a variety of cancers including carcinomas of the breast and the adrenal cortex, tumors of brain and muscle tissue, and leukemias. Affected individuals develop cancer at a young age and often at multiple primary sites. A study has been conducted into the genetic basis of cancer in a particular Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. Examination of p53 as a candidate susceptibility gene revealed that, in two affected individuals, there was an aberrant larger transcript of 3.6 kilobases present in both tumor and constitutional material in addition to the normal-sized 2.8-kilobase transcript. The additional transcript was not found in three unaffected family members. S1 nuclease mapping localized the insertion toward the 5' end of the p53 transcript near exons 4 and 5, and sequencing revealed a point mutation in the splice donor site of intron 4 in the germ-line of the two affected individuals, which accounted for the presence of the larger transcript. The same splicing mutation was also detected in two obligate carriers and was not found in two unaffected individuals. As no mutations were detected in exons 5-8 in either tumor examined, the second p53 allele was most likely lost during tumorigenesis in both tumors. The demonstration of a germ-line splicing mutation in affected individuals from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family provides for a novel mechanism of p53 inactivation not seen previously in other affected families, in whom the mutations have all been missense.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

20501846
Population-based estimate of the contribution of TP53 mutations to subgroups of early-onset breast cancer: Australian Breast Cancer Family Study
Although germline TP53 mutations have been identified in women with breast cancer from families meeting Li-Fraumeni criteria, their contribution to breast cancer per se is not well known, but is thought to be minimal. We aimed to determine the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in subgroups of early-onset breast cancer. Germline TP53 mutation status was assessed by DNA sequencing, screening for heterozygous single-nucleotide polymorphisms, and Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification analyses. From an Australian population-based series of invasive breast cancers, we studied (a) 52 women diagnosed before age 30 years unselected for family history [very early-onset (VEO)] and (b) 42 women diagnosed in their 30s with two or more first- or second-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer [early-onset family history (EO-FH)]. Of the VEO group, two (4%) had a mutation: G13203A (exon 6 missense) in a 24-year-old and a large 5,338-bp genomic deletion in a 26-year-old. Neither had a family cancer history that met Li-Fraumeni criteria. Of the EO-FH group, three (7%) had a mutation: T13240G (a known intron 5 splicing mutation) in a 36-year-old from a classic Li-Fraumeni family; G12299A (exon 4 missense) in a 33-year-old from a Li-Fraumeni-like family; and 14058delG (exon 7 frame-shift) in a 39-year-old with a family cancer history that did not meet Li-Fraumeni criteria. Germline TP53 mutations play a larger role in early-onset breast cancer than previously thought, and in this context, can be evident outside clinically defined Li-Fraumeni families.

24916180
Double heterozygosity for germline mutations in BRCA1 and p53 in a woman with early onset breast cancer
To report on a highly unusual case of a 20-year-old woman who presented with multifocal metaplastic breast cancer and was subsequently found to carry deleterious germline mutations in both BRCA1 and p53. Genetic testing was requested on an expedited basis to assist in surgical decision-making and BRCA1/2 and p53 genetic analysis was ordered concurrently. BRCA1/2 and p53 analyses were completed using a combination of direct DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA). The patient was found to carry a deletion of exon 3 of the BRCA1 gene and a splice site mutation at the exon4/intron4 boundary of the p53 gene. To our knowledge, this is the first report of double heterozygosity in BRCA1 and p53. The patient's clinical presentation is highly reminiscent of that predicted by preclinical mouse models. In patients with early onset breast cancer, the possibility of germline mutations in more than one cancer susceptibility gene should be considered. This could have important clinical implications for patients and their at-risk family members.

33087929
Exome sequencing and characterization of 49,960 individuals in the UK Biobank
The UK Biobank is a prospective study of 502,543 individuals, combining extensive phenotypic and genotypic data with streamlined access for researchers around the world1. Here we describe the release of exome-sequence data for the first 49,960 study participants, revealing approximately 4 million coding variants (of which around 98.6% have a frequency of less than 1%). The data include 198,269 autosomal predicted loss-of-function (LOF) variants, a more than 14-fold increase compared to the imputed sequence. Nearly all genes (more than 97%) had at least one carrier with a LOF variant, and most genes (more than 69%) had at least ten carriers with a LOF variant. We illustrate the power of characterizing LOF variants in this population through association analyses across 1,730 phenotypes. In addition to replicating established associations, we found novel LOF variants with large effects on disease traits, including PIEZO1 on varicose veins, COL6A1 on corneal resistance, MEPE on bone density, and IQGAP2 and GMPR on blood cell traits. We further demonstrate the value of exome sequencing by surveying the prevalence of pathogenic variants of clinical importance, and show that 2% of this population has a medically actionable variant. Furthermore, we characterize the penetrance of cancer in carriers of pathogenic BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. Exome sequences from the first 49,960 participants highlight the promise of genome sequencing in large population-based studies and are now accessible to the scientific community.

8302608
Splice-site mutation of the p53 gene in a family with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer
Germline mutations within evolutionary conserved exons of the p53 gene predispose to tumor development in several familial cancer syndromes. We now report identification of a novel p53 mutation affecting the splice acceptor site of exon 6 in the germline DNA of a family with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer. This splice-site mutation, which results in omission of exon 6 and creates a frame-shift and premature stop codon in transcripts from the mutant allele, was found in seven family members--four of whom have developed breast, ovarian or choroid plexus tumors before age 35. Our finding suggests the need to examine the entire p53 gene for splice-site, frame-shift, and nonsense (as well as missense) mutations in families with early-onset hereditary breast and breast-ovarian cancers not linked to the BRCA1 gene on chromosome 17q. We propose that the term 'p53 familial cancer syndrome' be applied to clusters of tumors in families with documented germline p53 mutations, regardless of the histopathologic findings or pattern of tumor development.

25619955
Candidate gene analysis of BRCA1/2 mutation-negative high-risk Russian breast cancer patients
Twenty one DNA repair genes were analyzed in a group of 95 BC patients, who displayed clinical features of hereditary disease predisposition but turned out to be negative for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 entire coding region as well as for founder disease-predisposing alleles in CHEK2, NBN/NBS1 and ATM genes. Full-length sequencing of CHEK2 and NBN/NBS1 failed to identify non-founder mutations. The analysis of TP53 revealed a woman carrying the R282W allele; further testing of additional 108 BC patients characterized by a very young age at onset (35 years or earlier) detected one more carrier of the TP53 germ-line defect. In addition, this study confirmed non-random occurrence of PALB2 truncating mutations in Russian hereditary BC patients. None of the studied cases carried germ-line defects in recently discovered hereditary BC genes, BRIP1, FANCC, MRE11A and RAD51C. The analysis of genes with yet unproven BC-predisposing significance (BARD1, BRD7, CHEK1, DDB2, ERCC1, EXO1, FANCG, PARP1, PARP2, RAD51, RNF8, WRN) identified single women carrying a protein-truncating allele, WRN R1406X. DNA sequencing of another set of 95 hereditary BC cases failed to reveal additional WRN heterozygous genotypes. Since WRN is functionally similar to the known BC-predisposing gene, BLM, it deserves to be analyzed in future hereditary BC studies. Furthermore, this investigation revealed a number of rare missense germ-line variants, which are classified as probably protein-damaging by online in silico tools and therefore may require further consideration.

9129144
A novel germ line p53 mutation in intron 6 in diverse childhood malignancies
Screening for p53 mutations in exons 5 to 8 in 124 pediatric malignancies identified 18 abnormal shifts using single strand conformation polymorphism: 12 were missense mutations and in 6, no mutation was detected in the exon or in the splice donor acceptor sequences. Sequencing was then performed in the adjacent introns, revealing a G to A base substitution at 39 base pairs upstream to exon 7. This mutation was identified in the germ line of five of the patients, and also in the father of one, whose parents were available. For comparison, of the 184 normal controls similarly screened, only one had this mutation (P=0.036). Positive staining of p53 protein was observed in three of the paraffin embedded tissues that were available: brain tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, and lymphocytes from a normal lymph node from the rhabdomyosarcoma patient. All tumors with the identified intron mutation were Li-Fraumeni syndrome tumors. Sequencing of all exons including splice sites was performed and revealed no mutation. We suggest that this mutation in intron 6 of the p53 gene stabilizes the wild type p53 protein, resulting in its abnormal accumulation. Mutations in the noncoding region of p53 should be further studied.

10706125
Elevated frequency and functional activity of a specific germ-line p53 intron mutation in familial breast cancer
Previous studies have determined that the frequency of germ-line p53 mutations in familial breast cancer patients is 1% or less, but these reports have not investigated the importance of polymorphic intron base changes in the p53 gene. Therefore, we investigated the frequency of both exon and intron germ-line p53 base changes in 42 breast cancer patients with a strong family history of breast cancer. The mean age of presentation of these patients was 44.0 years (range, 29-69), and 12 of 42 (29%) were of known Ashkenazi ancestry. Purified DNA obtained from the 42 index cases was screened for germ-line p53 mutations in exons 2-11 and surrounding introns using a combination of intron based primers for PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing, and microarray sequencing using the Affymetrix p53 gene chip methodology. Morphological analysis of apoptosis and cell survival determination were performed on EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from two patients with the p53 intron 6 mutation. A germ-line mutation in the p53 gene at nucleotide 13964 with a G to C base change (13964GC) was identified in 3 of 42 (7.1%) hereditary breast cancer patients. Two patients were heterozygous for this mutation, and one patient had a homozygous mutation. In comparison, 0 of 171 (0%) of sporadic breast cancer patients had the p53 13964GC mutation (P = 0.0003). We found that 0 of 42 (0%) of these hereditary breast cancer patients had other germ-line p53 mutation in exons 2-11. However, pedigree analysis demonstrated that all three patients had strong family histories of multiple types of cancers consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome but with late age of onset. Comprehensive BRCA1 and BRCA2 nucleotide analysis from patients with the p53 13964GC mutation revealed no concomitant deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, although they were found in the other hereditary breast cancer patients. Functional analysis of two immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from patients with the p53 13964GC mutation demonstrated prolonged in vitro survival in response to cisplatinum treatment and showed decreased chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Immunohistochemical analysis of breast tumors from these patients revealed high levels of mutant p53 protein, suggesting a functional mutation in the p53 gene. In summary, we have identified a single p53 intron mutation in familial breast cancer patients that is present at elevated frequency and has functional activity.

26029016
The benefit and burden of cancer screening in Li-Fraumeni syndrome: a case report
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare cancer predisposition syndrome classically associated with remarkably early onset of cancer in families with a typical spectrum of malignancies, including sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma. Because the risks of cancer development are strikingly high for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, aggressive cancer surveillance is often pursued in these individuals. However, optimal screening methods and intervals for Li-Fraumeni syndrome have yet to be determined. In addition, there may be a significant psychosocial burden to intensive cancer surveillance and some prevention modalities. Here, we describe a case of a young woman with a de novo mutation in TP53 and multiple malignancies, with her most recent cancers found at early, curable stages due to aggressive cancer screening. The potential benefits and risks of intensive cancer surveillance in hereditary cancer syndromes is discussed.

24373500
Multiplex genetic cancer testing identifies pathogenic mutations in TP53 and CDH1 in a patient with bilateral breast and endometrial adenocarcinoma
Background:
        
      
      Germline genetic testing for familial cancer syndromes is usually performed serially for the most likely genetic causes. In recent years the way genetic testing carried out has changed, as next generation sequencing now allows the simultaneous testing of multiple susceptibility genes at low costs.

28475293
Synonymous mutation in TP53 results in a cryptic splice site affecting its DNA-binding site in an adolescent with two primary sarcomas
Pathologic variants in TP53 are known risk factors for the development of cancer. We report a 17-year-old male who presented with two primary sarcomas. Germline sequencing revealed a novel TP53 c.672 G>A mutation. Sequencing revealed wild-type TP53 in the parents, and there was no history of cancer in first-degree relatives. This de novo synonymous germline mutation results in a 5' cryptic splice site that is bound by U1, resulting in a shift of the splice site by 5 base pairs. The frame shift results in a truncated protein at residue 246, which disrupts the DNA-binding domain of p53.

30709381
Prevalence of germline mutations in the TP53 gene in patients with early-onset breast cancer in the Mexican population
Background:
        
      
      Heterozygous germline TP53 gene mutations result in Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS). Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequent tumor in young women with LFS. An important issue related to BC in the Mexican population is the average age at diagnosis, which is approximately 11 years younger than that of patients in the United States (U.S.) and Europe. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of germline mutations in TP53 among young Mexican BC patients.

23409989
Novel p53 splicing site mutation in Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome with osteosarcoma
We describe a 15-year-old girl with a novel germline p53 splice site mutation who developed an osteosarcoma. She received several cycles of chemotherapy with complete resection of the primary tumor without amputation, and has maintained remission for 18 months. Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome was suspected based on familial history. Sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel germline p53 gene mutation resulting in a G to A transition at position +1 at the donor splice site of intron 6, creating a 6 amino acid insertion. This case provides interesting insight into the phenotype-genotype correlation in LFL syndrome with a TP53 splicing mutation.

22495821
Functional studies of a novel germline p53 splicing mutation identified in a patient with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome
Most p53 mutations identified in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) are missense mutations; splicing mutations have rarely been reported. A novel splicing p53 mutation was identified in a patient with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). Usually, p53 missense mutants identified in LFS and cancer cells function as dominant negative mutations interfering with wild-type p53 function. However, the mechanism by which p53 haploinsufficiency causes carcinogenesis is not well characterized. In this study, we describe a novel splicing mutation that results in the loss-of-function of p53. These findings suggest a linkage between the loss-of-function type p53 mutation and a LFL phenotype.

26681682
Genetic testing in a cohort of young patients with HER2-amplified breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Young age at diagnosis for breast cancer raises the question of genetic susceptibility. We explored breast cancer susceptibility genes testing on ≤40-year-old patients with HER2-amplified invasive breast cancer.

14656244
Novel p53 germline mutation in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome


20967502
Inherited germline TP53 mutation encodes a protein with an aberrant C-terminal motif in a case of pediatric adrenocortical tumor
Childhood adrenocortical tumor (ACT), a very rare malignancy, has an annual worldwide incidence of about 0.3 per million children younger than 15 years. The association between inherited germline mutations of the TP53 gene and an increased predisposition to ACT was described in the context of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In fact, about two-thirds of children with ACT have a TP53 mutation. However, less than 10% of pediatric ACT cases occur in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, suggesting that inherited low-penetrance TP53 mutations play an important role in pediatric adrenal cortex tumorigenesis. We identified a novel inherited germline TP53 mutation affecting the acceptor splice site at intron 10 in a child with an ACT and no family history of cancer. The lack of family history of cancer and previous information about the carcinogenic potential of the mutation led us to further characterize it. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the non-natural and highly hydrophobic C-terminal segment of the frame-shifted mutant p53 protein may disrupt its tumor suppressor function by causing misfolding and aggregation. Our findings highlight the clinical and genetic counseling dilemmas that arise when an inherited TP53 mutation is found in a child with ACT without relatives with Li-Fraumeni-component tumors.

25269805
Impact of G-quadruplex structures and intronic polymorphisms rs17878362 and rs1642785 on basal and ionizing radiation-induced expression of alternative p53 transcripts
G-quadruplex (G4) structures in intron 3 of the p53 pre-mRNA modulate intron 2 splicing, altering the balance between the fully spliced p53 transcript (FSp53, encoding full-length p53) and an incompletely spliced transcript retaining intron 2 (p53I2 encoding the N-terminally truncated Δ40p53 isoform). The nucleotides forming G4s overlap the polymorphism rs17878362 (A1 wild-type allele, A2 16-base pair insertion) which is in linkage disequilibrium with rs1642785 in intron 2 (c.74+38 G>C). Biophysical and biochemical analyses show rs17878362 A2 alleles form similar G4 structures as A1 alleles although their position is shifted with respect to the intron 2 splice acceptor site. In addition basal FSp53 and p53I2 levels showed allele specific differences in both p53-null cells transfected with reporter constructs or lymphoblastoid cell lines. The highest FSp53 and p53I2 levels were associated with combined rs1642785-GG/rs17878362-A1A1 alleles, whereas the presence of rs1642785-C with either rs17878362 allele was associated with lower p53 pre-mRNA, total TP53, FSp53 and p53I2 levels, due to the lower stability of transcripts containing rs1642785-C. Treatment of lymphoblastoid cell with the G4 binding ligands 360A or PhenDC3 or with ionizing radiation increased FSp53 levels only in cells with rs17878362 A1 alleles, suggesting that under this G4 configuration full splicing is favoured. These results demonstrate the complex effects of intronic TP53 polymorphisms on G4 formation and identify a new role for rs1642785 on mRNA splicing and stability, and thus on the differential expression of isoform-specific transcripts of the TP53 gene.

20127977
DeltaN133p53 expression levels in relation to haplotypes of the TP53 internal promoter region
The transcription of the DeltaN133p53 isoform of the TP53 gene is controlled by an internal promoter region (IPR) containing eight polymorphisms in 11 common haplotypes, following a resequencing of 47 Caucasians. We assayed the functional effects of the commonest six haplotypes on the promoter activity with a luciferase reporter system, in HeLa and 293T cells. These studies showed that different IPR haplotypes are associated with differences in the promoter activity resulting in marked variation in the baseline expression of DeltaN133p53. In vivo quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on human tissues confirmed that the baseline levels of DeltaN133p53 showed haplotype specific differences that paralleled those seen in vitro. When cell lines were treated with camptothecin, the fold-increase in DeltaN133p53 levels was dose-dependent but haplotype-independent (i.e., similar for all the haplotypes). Finally, we used an electrophoretic mobility shift assay to analyze the rs1794287 polymorphism and found changes in the pattern of protein binding. This partially confirmed our in silico analysis showing that the polymorphism rs1794287 can affect the function of the internal promoter by changing its affinity for several transcription factors. Thus, we showed that the expression of DeltaN133p53 is under genetic control, and suggested the presence of interindividual differences underlying this mechanism.

21946351
A germline variant in the TP53 polyadenylation signal confers cancer susceptibility
To identify new risk variants for cutaneous basal cell carcinoma, we performed a genome-wide association study of 16 million SNPs identified through whole-genome sequencing of 457 Icelanders. We imputed genotypes for 41,675 Illumina SNP chip-typed Icelanders and their relatives. In the discovery phase, the strongest signal came from rs78378222[C] (odds ratio (OR) = 2.36, P = 5.2 × 10(-17)), which has a frequency of 0.0192 in the Icelandic population. We then confirmed this association in non-Icelandic samples (OR = 1.75, P = 0.0060; overall OR = 2.16, P = 2.2 × 10(-20)). rs78378222 is in the 3' untranslated region of TP53 and changes the AATAAA polyadenylation signal to AATACA, resulting in impaired 3'-end processing of TP53 mRNA. Investigation of other tumor types identified associations of this SNP with prostate cancer (OR = 1.44, P = 2.4 × 10(-6)), glioma (OR = 2.35, P = 1.0 × 10(-5)) and colorectal adenoma (OR = 1.39, P = 1.6 × 10(-4)). However, we observed no effect for breast cancer, a common Li-Fraumeni syndrome tumor (OR = 1.06, P = 0.57, 95% confidence interval 0.88-1.27).

22706378
Rare TP53 genetic variant associated with glioma risk and outcome
Validation of a recent finding linking a rare variant in TP53 to the risk of glioma, the most common primary brain tumour, is reported here. This study genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs78378222 in 566 glioma cases and 603 controls. The variant 'C' allele (with an allelic frequency of 1.1% in controls) was associated with a 3.5-fold excess in glioma risk (odds ratio 3.54; p=0.0001). Variant carriers had significantly improved survival (hazard ratio 0.52; p=0.009) when compared to non-carriers. The rs78378222 SNP is the first confirmed rare susceptibility variant in glioma. Results may shed light on the aetiology and progression of these tumours.

22800615
A functional germline variant in the P53 polyadenylation signal and risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
Aim:
        
      
      P53 plays a critical role in the maintenance of genomic stability as well as the control of cell growth and apoptosis. Recently, an uncommon P53 genetic variant (rs78378222) was reported to be significantly associated with multiple cancers in Caucasians in a genome-wide association study. rs78378222 locates in the 3'-untranslated region of the P53 gene, and this A-to-C polymorphism results in changes of the AATAAA polyadenylation signal to AATACA, which leads to impaired 3'-end processing of P53 mRNA and decreased P53 expression.

8479743
A novel germline p53 splicing mutation in a pediatric patient with a second malignant neoplasm
A novel germline p53 splicing mutation was identified in a pediatric patient with two metachronous primary cancers that are constituent tumors of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Genomic DNA from the second tumor showed the same mutation and loss of heterozygosity at the p53 locus. The mutant mRNA and protein were present in the tumor tissue. In contrast, in the normal tissues bearing the germline mutation in the heterozygous state, predominantly normal mRNA was expressed and the mutant p53 protein was not detectable. The functional silence and relative lack of mutant p53 mRNA expression in the normal tissues of this patient may be caused by decreased stability or decreased production. If this proves a more general pattern of expression of mutant p53 in individuals with germline mutations, these findings may explain the paucity of tumors in individuals affected with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

29737433
Report of a bi-allelic truncating germline mutation in TP53
The TP53 gene is fundamental to genomic integrity, cell cycle regulation, and apoptosis; it is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancer. Heterozygous germline mutations cause the autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome, Li-Fraumeni Syndrome. Homozygous germline TP53 mutations in humans are rare. We report an infant from a consanguineous family who presented with synchronous malignancies. Remarkably, he carries a homozygous germline TP53 mutation (NM_000546.4:c.52delA), predicted to cause protein truncation. The family history is consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

21311097
A molecular signature of normal breast epithelial and stromal cells from Li-Fraumeni syndrome mutation carriers
Specific changes in gene expression during cancer initiation should enable discovery of biomarkers for risk assessment, early detection and targets for chemoprevention. It has been previously demonstrated that altered mRNA and proteome signatures of morphologically normal cells bearing a single inherited "hit" in a tumor suppressor gene parallel many changes observed in the corresponding sporadic cancer. Here, we report on the global gene expression profile of morphologically normal, cultured primary breast epithelial and stromal cells from Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) TP53 mutation carriers. Our analyses identified multiple changes in gene expression in both morphologically normal breast epithelial and stromal cells associated with TP53 haploinsufficiency, as well as interlocking pathways. Notably, a dysregulated p53 signaling pathway was readily detectable. Pharmacological intervention with the p53 rescue compounds CP-31398 and PRIMA-1 provided further evidence in support of the central role of p53 in affecting these changes in LFS cells and treatment for this cancer. Because loss of signaling mediated by TP53 is associated with the development and survival of many human tumors, identification of gene expression profiles in morphologically normal cells that carry "one-hit" p53 mutations may reveal novel biomarkers, enabling the discovery of potential targets for chemoprevention of sporadic tumors as well.

30612635
Cancer susceptibility gene mutations in type I and II endometrial cancer
Objectives:
        
      
      To determine the incidence of germline cancer predisposition gene mutations in patients with endometrial cancer (EC) subtypes.

28911001
Whole-exome analysis of a Li-Fraumeni family trio with a novel TP53 PRD mutation and anticipation profile
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a clinically heterogeneous familial cancer predisposition syndrome with autosomal-dominant inheritance caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. We here analyze the genetic background of a family with a 4-year-proband presented with a Li-Fraumeni tumor. The mother developed breast cancer at age 37 and the proband died at age 8. We performed Sanger sequencing and whole-exome sequencing on peripheral blood DNA from proband and relatives. Data analysis selected only high-quality score and depth reads, rare variants and protein impact involving missense, non-sense, frameshift and splice disrupt mutations. Disease implicated variants and predicted deleterious alterations were also chosen. TP53 genetic testing revealed a never reported TP53 deletion arose as de novo mutation in the mother and inherited by the proband. We then performed whole-exome analysis of the trio to uncover inherited variants from the father that potentially worsen the already altered genetic background in the proband. No pathogenic variants were inherited in autosomal recessive, de novo dominant or X-linked recessive manner. Comparing proband and father exome we detected 25 predicted deleterious variants including a nonsense mutation in ERCC3. Those inherited mutations are possible candidate modifiers linked to TP53, explaining the proband accelerated tumor onset compared to the mother and providing a possible explanation of the genetic anticipation event in this Li-Fraumeni family.

33407806
Revisiting multiple erroneous genetic testing results and clinical misinterpretations in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: lessons for translational medicine
Background:
        
      
      Many cancer patients undergo sophisticated laboratory testing, which requires proper interpretation and interaction between different specialists.

17554785
Identification of a novel p53 in-frame deletion in a Li-Fraumeni-like family
We describe a 2-year-old female with a completely resected cerebral pilocytic astrocytoma who subsequently developed B-progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Her father and paternal uncle were previously diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme. Sequence analysis of the patient's p53 gene revealed a novel germline three base-pair deletion (339_341delCTT) in exon 4, resulting in removal of an evolutionarily conserved phenylalanine amino acid residue at codon 113. The same mutation was found in the patient's two clinically unaffected siblings. The in-frame deletion we describe has not previously been reported and adds to our understanding of the biologic effects of p53 gene mutation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS).

19250386
A molecular approach for identifying individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who have a limited family history


15342977
Prenatal diagnosis in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Purpose:
        
      
      The hallmark of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer syndrome, is constitutional TP53 mutation. The authors addressed the complex question of predictive prenatal genetic testing for cancer risk associated with inheritance of TP53 mutation.

25047674
EGFR-mutated lung cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
This is a revised case report of a 52 year old Caucasian female with Li-Fraumeni syndrome with a rare TP53 mutation, who was treated for breast cancer and later developed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutated non-small cell lung cancer.

8780740
A novel deletion within exon 6 of TP53 in a family with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, and LOH in a benign lesion from a mutation carrier
We report here a family with some of the characteristics of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (Li-Fraumeni-like) in which there is a 2 base pair deletion within exon 6 of TP53 in two affected individuals. Of particular interest in this family is a study of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the TP53 gene, and the finding that there is LOH in all cancers available for study from mutation carriers, and additionally from a benign endometrial polyp from one of those patients. Two other family members, one with a rectal carcinoma aged 55, the other with two separate benign lesions under the age of 45, were both wild-type for the TP53 mutation.

8639798
The p53 gene in pediatric therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia
We investigated the frequency of p53 mutations in 19 pediatric cases of therapy-related leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. Eleven children presented with acute myeloid leukemia, one with mixed-lineage leukemia, two with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and five with myelodysplasia at times ranging from 11 months to 9 years after a primary cancer diagnosis. The primary cancers, which included 11 solid tumors and eight leukemias, were treated with various combinations of DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors, alkylating agents, or irradiation. Leukemic or myelodysplastic marrows were screened for possible mutations by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of p53 exons 4 to 8. The only observed mutation was an inherited 2-basepair deletion at codon 209 in exon 6 that would shift the open reading frame, create a premature termination codon, and foreshorten the resultant protein. Prior therapy in this patient included DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors, alkylating agents, and irradiation. The secondary leukemia presented as myelodysplasia with monosomies of chromosomes 5 and 7 and abnormalities of chromosome 17. Although the primary cancer was an embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and there was a family history of cancer, the case did not fulfill the clinical criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. This study suggests that germline p53 mutations may predispose some children to therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia, but that p53 mutations otherwise are infrequent in this setting.

30322717
Germline pathogenic variants identified in women with ovarian tumors
Objective:
        
      
      The recognition of genes implicated in ovarian cancer risk beyond BRCA1, BRCA2, and the Lynch syndrome genes has increased the variety of testing options available to providers and patients. We report the frequency of pathogenic variants identified among individuals with ovarian cancer undergoing clinical genetic testing via a multi-gene hereditary cancer panel.

8034301
Single base pair germ-line deletion in the p53 gene in a cancer predisposed family
A family with an aggregation of adrenocortical carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and early onset breast cancer was referred to our laboratory. Because this aggregation was reminiscent of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, germ-line mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene was sought in the DNA of two affected members. The highly conserved regions spanning exons 5 to 8 of the p53 gene were screened by a previously validated denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis method. A single base pair deletion at codon 215 was detected in constitutional DNA of the two patients, and in the DNA extracted from an adrenocortical carcinoma tumor specimen of the propositus. This deletion is predicted to lead to the formation of a truncated p53 protein, a relatively rare event in Li-Fraumeni families. The spectrum of tumors observed in this family does not differ markedly from the spectrum observed in families with missense p53 mutations.

29478780
Inherited DNA-Repair Defects in Colorectal Cancer
Colorectal cancer (CRC) heritability has been estimated to be around 30%. However, mutations in the known CRC-susceptibility genes explain CRC risk in fewer than 10% of affected individuals. Germline mutations in DNA-repair genes (DRGs) have recently been reported in CRC, but their contribution to CRC risk is largely unknown. We evaluated the gene-level germline mutation enrichment of 40 DRGs in 680 unselected CRC individuals and 27,728 ancestry-matched cancer-free adults. Significant findings were then examined in independent cohorts of 1,661 unselected CRC individuals and 1,456 individuals with early-onset CRC. Of the 680 individuals in the discovery set, 31 (4.56%) individuals harbored germline pathogenic mutations in known CRC-susceptibility genes, and another 33 (4.85%) individuals had DRG mutations that have not been previously associated with CRC risk. Germline pathogenic mutations in ATM and PALB2 were enriched in both the discovery (OR = 2.81 and p = 0.035 for ATM and OR = 4.91 and p = 0.024 for PALB2) and validation (OR = 2.97 and adjusted p = 0.0013 for ATM and OR = 3.42 and adjusted p = 0.034 for PALB2) sets. Biallelic loss of ATM was evident in all individuals with matched tumor profiling. CRC individuals also had higher rates of actionable mutations in the HR pathway, which can substantially increase the risk of developing cancers other than CRC. Our analysis provides evidence for ATM and PALB2 as CRC-risk genes, underscoring the importance of the homologous recombination pathway in CRC. In addition, we identified frequent complete homologous recombination deficiency in CRC tumors, representing a unique opportunity to explore targeted therapeutic interventions such as poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor (PARPi).

16333835
Malignant triton tumor in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and a novel TP53 mutation
We report a 3-year-old boy with a malignant triton tumor (MTT) involving the left masticator space with local invasion and regional lymph node metastasis. Family history and detection of a novel germline TP53 mutation confirmed his diagnosis of Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). MTT has not been previously described in association with LFS. This case along with a comprehensive review of the literature, illustrate the importance of both somatic and germline TP53 mutations in the pathogenesis MTT. The tumor could not be resected and he was successfully treated with intensive induction chemotherapy, irradiation, and high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell transplantation.

23172776
Drastic effect of germline TP53 missense mutations in Li-Fraumeni patients
In contrast to other tumor suppressor genes, the majority of TP53 alterations are missense mutations. We have previously reported that in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), germline TP53 missense mutations are associated with an earlier age of tumor onset. In a larger series, we observed that mean age of tumor onset in patients harboring dominant negative missense mutations and clearly null mutations was 22.6 and 37.5 years, respectively. To assess the impact of heterozygous germline TP53 mutations in the genetic context of the patients, we developed a new functional assay of the p53 pathway on the basis of induction of DNA damage in Epstein-Barr-virus-immortalized lymphocytes, followed by comparative gene-expression profiling. In wild-type lymphocytes, we identified a core of 173 genes whose expression was induced more than twofold, of which 46 were known p53 target genes. In LFS lymphocytes with canonical missense mutations, the number of induced genes and the level of known p53 target genes induction were strongly reduced as compared with controls and LFS lymphocytes with null mutations. These results show that certain germline missense TP53 mutations, such as those with dominant negative effect, dramatically alter the response to DNA damage. This probably explains why TP53 alterations are predominantly missense mutations.

7767487
Familial brain tumour syndrome associated with a p53 germline deletion of codon 236
This report describes clinical, neuropathological and molecular genetic findings in a Swiss family with four brain tumours in only two generations. The neoplasms observed covered a wide range of biologic behaviour, from a slowly growing lesion already apparent at birth, to anaplastic astrocytoma in a young adult and glioblastomas at the age of less than 10 years. The only non-neural neoplasms in this family were a case of leukemia and an adrenocortical carcinoma. A germline deletion of codon 236 of the p53 tumour suppressor gene was identified as an underlying cause and detected in all affected family members. This mutation has not previously been reported as germline transmission or in sporadic tumours. The unusual accumulation of CNS tumours may be due to a certain organ-specific effect of this particular p53 mutation or it may reflect the specific genetic back-ground of this family.

30875412
Discoveries beyond BRCA1/2: Multigene testing in an Asian multi-ethnic cohort suspected of hereditary breast cancer syndrome in the real world
Background:
        
      
      Due to historically low uptake of genetic testing, the mutational spectrum of Asians with Hereditary Breast Cancer (HBC) is not well understood. This study sought to understand the incidence and spectrum of germline mutations in Asian patients with suspected HBC in a clinic setting.

9723024
A novel TP53 germ-line mutation identified in a girl with a primitive neuroectodermal tumor and her father
A search of TP53 mutations was undertaken in a series of 51 pediatric brain tumors. The only germ-line mutation was detected in a 9-year-old girl with a PNET. Her family history was unremarkable for neoplastic disease, except for the paternal grandfather, who died of a gallbladder carcinoma at an advanced age. The mutation was a thymine deletion at the first base of codon 241, leading to termination codon at position 246 that has not previously been reported. This mutation was found to be inherited from the proband's father, who was healthy at age 40. In the tumoral sample, loss of heterozygosity in several 17p markers was found, the only TP53 allele preserved in the tumor was the mutated one. The presence of two short tandem repeats and two different palindromic sequences spanning the deletion lead us to propose the predisposition of this region to forming a complex secondary structure during replication. Consequently, it could have facilitated the present deletion. Furthermore, six other short deletions affecting--partially or totally--the region implicated in the folding model that we propose have been described in the literature. These findings confirm that this sequence represents a hotspot of deletion in the TP53 gene.

30886117
From uncertainty to pathogenicity: clinical and functional interrogation of a rare TP53 in-frame deletion
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Although more than 200 missense and null TP53 mutations are well established as disease-causing, little is known about the pathogenicity and cancer risks associated with small in-frame deletions. This leads to challenges in variant classification and subsequent difficulty making a molecular diagnosis. We report the genetic testing process for a pediatric patient diagnosed with an undifferentiated high-grade brain tumor following his mother's diagnosis of early-onset bilateral breast cancer. Sequential testing revealed that both harbored a heterozygous three-nucleotide deletion in exon 7 of TP53 (c.764_766delTCA; I255del), which was classified as a variant of uncertain significance. Because the maternal family history was void of any other LFS spectrum tumors, additional information was needed to effectively classify the variant. Targeted TP53 testing of the patient's maternal grandparents confirmed that neither carried the variant; this new de novo data upgraded the variant classification to likely pathogenic. To assess the impact of this mutation on the encoded p53 protein, additional in vitro analyses were performed. Structural modeling predicted that the deletion of isoleucine at codon 255 would disrupt the architecture of the DNA-binding domain, suggesting that it might negatively impact p53 function. Consistent with this notion, the I255del mutant protein exhibited significantly impaired transcriptional activity and greatly reduced growth suppressive properties, similar to more well-characterized LFS-associated p53 mutants. This report illustrates the importance of seeking additional evidence to assign proper pathogenicity classification, which enables optimal genetic counseling and medical management of individuals with LFS and their at-risk relatives.

8685209
Ovarian, peritoneal, and endometrial serous carcinoma: clonal origin of multifocal disease
The clonality of disseminated serous carcinoma involving the ovary, peritoneum, and, occasionally, the endometrium is controversial. Histopathologic examination alone cannot unequivocally distinguish between a monoclonal origin and a multicentric origin. Two patients with peritoneal serous carcinoma with minimal ovarian involvement (one with endometrial serous carcinoma), nine patients with stage III bilateral ovarian carcinoma, and one patient with stage III bilateral carcinosarcoma were studied for clonality. One patient with ovarian carcinoma that recurred after chemotherapy was also studied. Previous analyses of single frozen tumor specimens from these patients had identified different p53 gene mutations in each patient. To test the hypothesis that the disseminated cancers had a monoclonal origin, we assayed DNA from numerous foci from each patient to determine whether the known p53 mutation was present in each specimen. Identical mutations were detected in the tumor foci from each patient with peritoneal dissemination and minimal ovarian involvement, including one patient with an endometrial serous carcinoma as well. In all the patients with bilateral ovarian cancer, the genetic change in p53 was identical in both ovarian tumors. Genetic progression was observed in two patients, one of whom showed a loss of heterozygosity involving the p53 gene in a recurrent tumor. In the second patient, a p53 mutation not present in either ovarian tumor was detected in a metastatic tumor from the omentum. These results strongly suggest that disseminated serous carcinomas, whether primary in the ovary, endometrium, or peritoneum, are of monoclonal rather than multicentric origin; that bilateral stage III ovarian cancers are typically of monoclonal origin; and that additional genetic events involving p53 might occur during progression of these tumors.

11102977
High frequency of recurrent mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Polish families with breast and ovarian cancer
Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes result in a significantly increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Other genes involved in an increased predisposition to breast cancer include the TP53 gene, mutated in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. To estimate the frequency of germ-line mutations in these three genes in Upper Silesia, we have analyzed 47 breast/ovarian cancer families from that region. We found five different disease predisposing mutations in 17 (36%) families. Twelve families (25.5%) carried known BRCA1 mutations (5382insC and C61G), four families (8.5%) carried novel BRCA2 mutations (9631delC and 6886delGAAAA), and one family (2%) harbored novel mutation 1095del8 in the TP53 gene, which is the largest germline deletion in coding sequence of this gene identified thus far. The 5382insC mutation in BRCA1 was found in 11 families and the 9631delC mutation in BRCA2 occurred in three families. These two mutations taken together contribute to 82% of all mutations found in this study, and 30% of the families investigated harbor one of these mutations. The very high frequency of common mutations observed in these families can only be compared to that reported for Ashkenazi Jewish, Icelandic, and Russian high-risk families. This frequency, however, may not be representative for the entire Polish population. The observed distribution of mutations will favor routine pre-screening of predisposed families using a simple and cost-effective test.

30146126
De Novo Mutations Activating Germline TP53 in an Inherited Bone-Marrow-Failure Syndrome
Inherited bone-marrow-failure syndromes (IBMFSs) include heterogeneous genetic disorders characterized by bone-marrow failure, congenital anomalies, and an increased risk of malignancy. Many lines of evidence have suggested that p53 activation might be central to the pathogenesis of IBMFSs, including Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) and dyskeratosis congenita (DC). However, the exact role of p53 activation in each clinical feature remains unknown. Here, we report unique de novo TP53 germline variants found in two individuals with an IBMFS accompanied by hypogammaglobulinemia, growth retardation, and microcephaly mimicking DBA and DC. TP53 is a tumor-suppressor gene most frequently mutated in human cancers, and occasional germline variants occur in Li-Fraumeni cancer-predisposition syndrome. Most of these mutations affect the core DNA-binding domain, leading to compromised transcriptional activities. In contrast, the variants found in the two individuals studied here caused the same truncation of the protein, resulting in the loss of 32 residues from the C-terminal domain (CTD). Unexpectedly, the p53 mutant had augmented transcriptional activities, an observation not previously described in humans. When we expressed this mutant in zebrafish and human-induced pluripotent stem cells, we observed impaired erythrocyte production. These findings together with close similarities to published knock-in mouse models of TP53 lacking the CTD demonstrate that the CTD-truncation mutations of TP53 cause IBMFS, providing important insights into the previously postulated connection between p53 and IBMFSs.

18664296
R497K polymorphism in epidermal growth factor receptor gene is associated with the risk of acute coronary syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Previous studies suggested that genetic polymorphisms in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene had been implicated in the susceptibility to some tumors and inflammatory diseases. EGFR has been recently implicated in vascular pathophysiological processes associated with excessive remodeling and atherosclerosis. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a clinical manifestation of preceding atherosclerosis. Our purpose was to investigate the association of the EGFR polymorphism with the risk of ACS. In this context, we analyzed the HER-1 R497K and EGFR intron 1 (CA)n repeat polymorphisms in 191 patients with ACS and 210 age- and sex-matched controls in a Chinese population, using a polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) strategy and direct sequencing.

28135048
Identification of recurrent BRCA1 mutation and its clinical relevance in Chinese Triple-negative breast cancer cohort
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all newly diagnosed breast cancers, and is enriched for germline mutation of BRCA. In Asian patients diagnosed with breast cancer, 268 deleterious mutations of BRCA1 and 242 of BRCA2 have been identified so far, including a reported BRCA1 frameshift mutation (rs80350973), apparently found only in Asian people, with a low prevalence of 0.3-1.7% in different breast cancer cohorts. Here, we reported the high prevalence (7.2%) of rs80350973 among 125 Chinese patients with TNBC, which implies its mutational predilection for certain breast cancer subtypes. Although its low prevalence had not indicated any particular clinical significance in previous studies, our results associated rs80350973 mutation with cell checkpoint malfunction, and was found to be more common in TNBC patients with high Ki-67 indices (P = 0.004). As Ki-67 overexpression is a predictor of poor prognosis in TNBC, inclusion of this mutation into genetic assessments may improve the clinical management of Chinese patients with TNBC.

30306255
Multigene panel testing beyond BRCA1/2 in breast/ovarian cancer Spanish families and clinical actionability of findings
Purpose:
        
      
      Few and small studies have been reported about multigene testing usage by massively parallel sequencing in European cancer families. There is an open debate about what genes should be tested, and the actionability of some included genes is under research.

26987750
Profiling of potential driver mutations in sarcomas by targeted next generation sequencing
Comprehensive genetic profiling by massively parallel sequencing, commonly known as next generation sequencing (NGS), is becoming the foundation of personalized oncology. For sarcomas very few targeted treatments are currently in routine use. In clinical practice the preoperative diagnostic workup of soft tissue tumours largely relies on core needle biopsies. Although mostly sufficient for histopathological diagnosis, only very limited amounts of formalin fixated paraffin embedded tissue are often available for predictive mutation analysis. Targeted NGS may thus open up new possibilities for comprehensive characterization of scarce biopsies. We therefore set out to search for driver mutations by NGS in a cohort of 55 clinically and morphologically well characterized sarcomas using low input of DNA from formalin fixated paraffin embedded tissues. The aim was to investigate if there are any recurrent or targetable aberrations in cancer driver genes in addition to known chromosome translocations in different types of sarcomas. We employed a panel covering 207 mutation hotspots in 50 cancer-associated genes to analyse DNA from nine gastrointestinal stromal tumours, 14 synovial sarcomas, seven myxoid liposarcomas, 22 Ewing sarcomas and three Ewing-like small round cell tumours at a large sequencing depth to detect also mutations that are subclonal or occur at low allele frequencies. We found nine mutations in eight different potential driver genes, some of which are potentially actionable by currently existing targeted therapies. Even though no recurrent mutations in driver genes were found in the different sarcoma groups, we show that targeted NGS-based sequencing is clearly feasible in a diagnostic setting with very limited amounts of paraffin embedded tissue and may provide novel insights into mesenchymal cell signalling and potentially druggable targets. Interestingly, we also identify five non-synonymous sequence variants in 4 established cancer driver genes in DNA from normal tissue from sarcoma patients that may possibly predispose or contribute to neoplastic development.

26689913
Patterns and functional implications of rare germline variants across 12 cancer types
Large-scale cancer sequencing data enable discovery of rare germline cancer susceptibility variants. Here we systematically analyse 4,034 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas cancer cases representing 12 cancer types. We find that the frequency of rare germline truncations in 114 cancer-susceptibility-associated genes varies widely, from 4% (acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)) to 19% (ovarian cancer), with a notably high frequency of 11% in stomach cancer. Burden testing identifies 13 cancer genes with significant enrichment of rare truncations, some associated with specific cancers (for example, RAD51C, PALB2 and MSH6 in AML, stomach and endometrial cancers, respectively). Significant, tumour-specific loss of heterozygosity occurs in nine genes (ATM, BAP1, BRCA1/2, BRIP1, FANCM, PALB2 and RAD51C/D). Moreover, our homology-directed repair assay of 68 BRCA1 rare missense variants supports the utility of allelic enrichment analysis for characterizing variants of unknown significance. The scale of this analysis and the somatic-germline integration enable the detection of rare variants that may affect individual susceptibility to tumour development, a critical step toward precision medicine.

31785789
Sex-Based Analysis of De Novo Variants in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
While genes with an excess of de novo mutations (DNMs) have been identified in children with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), few studies focus on DNM patterns where the sex of affected children is examined separately. We considered ∼8,825 sequenced parent-child trios (n ∼26,475 individuals) and identify 54 genes with a DNM enrichment in males (n = 18), females (n = 17), or overlapping in both the male and female subsets (n = 19). A replication cohort of 18,778 sequenced parent-child trios (n = 56,334 individuals) confirms 25 genes (n = 3 in males, n = 7 in females, n = 15 in both male and female subsets). As expected, we observe significant enrichment on the X chromosome for females but also find autosomal genes with potential sex bias (females, CDK13, ITPR1; males, CHD8, MBD5, SYNGAP1); 6.5% of females harbor a DNM in a female-enriched gene, whereas 2.7% of males have a DNM in a male-enriched gene. Sex-biased genes are enriched in transcriptional processes and chromatin binding, primarily reside in the nucleus of cells, and have brain expression. By downsampling, we find that DNM gene discovery is greatest when studying affected females. Finally, directly comparing de novo allele counts in NDD-affected males and females identifies one replicated genome-wide significant gene (DDX3X) with locus-specific enrichment in females. Our sex-based DNM enrichment analysis identifies candidate NDD genes differentially affecting males and females and indicates that the study of females with NDDs leads to greater gene discovery consistent with the female-protective effect.

30098700
Mutation profiles and clinical characteristics of Chinese males with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Objective:
        
      
      To investigate the mutation profiles and clinical characteristics of Chinese males with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) and discover new pathogenic genes that cause IHH.

33084842
Association of Damaging Variants in Genes With Increased Cancer Risk Among Patients With Congenital Heart Disease
Importance:
        
      
      Patients with congenital heart disease (CHD), the most common birth defect, have increased risks for cancer. Identification of the variables that contribute to cancer risk is essential for recognizing patients with CHD who warrant longitudinal surveillance and early interventions.

30610926
EGFR and ERBB2 Germline Mutations in Chinese Lung Cancer Patients and Their Roles in Genetic Susceptibility to Cancer
Introduction:
        
      
      Inherited genetic determinants of lung cancer risk remain relatively elusive. Germline mutations in EGFR and erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2) have been previously reported in lung cancers that may be associated with genetic susceptibility to lung cancer.

21575252
Germ-line mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are rare but may contribute to oncogenesis: a novel germ-line mutation in EGFR detected in a patient with lung adenocarcinoma
Background:
        
      
      A subset of lung cancer patients harbour EGFR somatic mutations in their tumours and are candidates for treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In a few cases EGFR mutations have also been found in the germ line, suggesting a role in lung carcinogenesis. Objetives of this study were: 1) To analyze the EGFR gene mutations in a population diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma from Northern Spain. 2) To determine the frequency of a new germ-line mutation found in our laboratory as well as the frequency in our population of three other EGFR germ-line mutations detected by other authors. 3) To determine whether the novel mutation detected may have a functional effect on the EGFR protein.

17956637
Polymorphisms in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene and the risk of primary lung cancer: a case-control study
Background:
        
      
      Polymorphisms in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) gene may influence EGFR production and/or activity, thereby modulating susceptibility to lung cancer. To test this hypothesis, we investigated the association between polymorphisms in the EGFR gene and the risk of lung cancer in a Korean population.

16258541
Inherited susceptibility to lung cancer may be associated with the T790M drug resistance mutation in EGFR
Somatic activating mutations in EGFR identify a subset of non-small cell lung cancer that respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Acquisition of drug resistance is linked to a specific secondary somatic mutation, EGFR T790M. Here we describe a family with multiple cases of non-small cell lung cancer associated with germline transmission of this mutation. Four of six tumors analyzed showed a secondary somatic activating EGFR mutation, arising in cis with the germline EGFR mutation T790M. These observations implicate altered EGFR signaling in genetic susceptibility to lung cancer.

19096324
Germ-line and somatic presentations of the EGFR T790M mutation in lung cancer


20033049
Novel mutant-selective EGFR kinase inhibitors against EGFR T790M
The clinical efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitors in EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is limited by the development of drug-resistance mutations, including the gatekeeper T790M mutation. Strategies targeting EGFR T790M with irreversible inhibitors have had limited success and are associated with toxicity due to concurrent inhibition of wild-type EGFR. All current EGFR inhibitors possess a structurally related quinazoline-based core scaffold and were identified as ATP-competitive inhibitors of wild-type EGFR. Here we identify a covalent pyrimidine EGFR inhibitor by screening an irreversible kinase inhibitor library specifically against EGFR T790M. These agents are 30- to 100-fold more potent against EGFR T790M, and up to 100-fold less potent against wild-type EGFR, than quinazoline-based EGFR inhibitors in vitro. They are also effective in murine models of lung cancer driven by EGFR T790M. Co-crystallization studies reveal a structural basis for the increased potency and mutant selectivity of these agents. These mutant-selective irreversible EGFR kinase inhibitors may be clinically more effective and better tolerated than quinazoline-based inhibitors. Our findings demonstrate that functional pharmacological screens against clinically important mutant kinases represent a powerful strategy to identify new classes of mutant-selective kinase inhibitors.

18528899
Identification of the rare EGFR mutation p.G796S as somatic and germline mutation in white patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
Background:
        
      
      Somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are involved in tumorigenesis and response to targeted therapies in distinct cancer types. Squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC) show an incidence of EGFR mutations varying from 7% in Asians to 0% to 4% in white patients. Mutational screening predominantly focuses on the analysis of hotspot regions of EGFR (exons 19 and 21).

20823418
Favorable response to gefitinib treatment of lung adenocarcinoma with coexisting germline and somatic epidermal growth factor receptor mutations


26901136
Identification of Novel Candidate Genes for Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer Susceptibility
Approximately 25-30% of colorectal cancer (CRC) cases are expected to result from a genetic predisposition, but in only 5-10% of these cases highly penetrant germline mutations are found. The remaining CRC heritability is still unexplained, and may be caused by a hitherto-undefined set of rare variants with a moderately penetrant risk. Here we aimed to identify novel risk factors for early-onset CRC using whole-exome sequencing, which was performed on a cohort of CRC individuals (n = 55) with a disease onset before 45 years of age. We searched for genes that were recurrently affected by rare variants (minor allele frequency ≤ 0.001) with potentially damaging effects and, subsequently, re-sequenced the candidate genes in a replication cohort of 174 early-onset or familial CRC individuals. Two functionally relevant genes with low frequency variants with potentially damaging effects, PTPN12 and LRP6, were found in at least three individuals. The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP-PEST, encoded by PTPN12, is a regulator of cell motility and LRP6 is a component of the WNT-FZD-LRP5-LRP6 complex that triggers WNT signaling. All variants in LRP6 were identified in individuals with an extremely early-onset of the disease (≤30 years of age), and two of the three variants showed increased WNT signaling activity in vitro. In conclusion, we present PTPN12 and LRP6 as novel candidates contributing to the heterogeneous susceptibility to CRC.

18355544
Novel germline mutation: EGFR V843I in patient with multiple lung adenocarcinomas and family members with lung cancer
A novel germline transmission of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation V843I in a family with multiple members with lung cancer is reported. The proband was a 70-year-old woman with multiple adenocarcinomas who exhibited secondary EGFR mutations, either L858R or L861Q, in the specimens of resected tumors, in addition to a germline EGFR V843I mutation. These observations suggest that the germline EGFR V843I mutation might have altered EGFR signaling in the multicentric development of adenocarcinoma, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, and atypical adenomatous hyperplasia and also might have had a role in the development of lung cancer in multiple members of her family.

21172876
Familial lung adenocarcinoma caused by the EGFR V843I germ-line mutation


23380224
A dramatic lung cancer course in a patient with a rare EGFR germline mutation exon 21 V843I: Is EGFR TKI resistance predictable?
We report on the medical history of a Caucasian smoker woman diagnosed with a stage IV NSCLC adenocarcinoma, characterized by a rare epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) point mutation in exon 21 codon 843 (p.V843I/c.2527G>A/COSMIC ID 85894). This genetic alteration revealed to be germline, after its presence was demonstrated in chondroblasts from the bone biopsy. While it is the first description of germline V843I mutation without concomitant additional known EGFR activating mutation, we modeled the EGFR ATP catalytic domain in complex with ATP, gefitinib and erlotinib using computer-aided approaches to estimate possible changes in affinity upon the V843I mutation.

16857818
Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation testing in the care of lung cancer patients
As the literature about epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations grows and screening for mutations becomes increasingly integrated into clinical care, it is important to examine how best to do somatic mutational analyses and how best to use the test results in clinical decision making. We began offering mutation screening by comprehensive direct sequence analysis of exons 18 to 24 of the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR in August 2004 as part of clinical cancer care and protocol therapy at our institutions. All identified potential mutations are confirmed with three to five independent PCRs of the original genomic DNA sample and, if not previously noted in the literature, are compared with the patient's germ-line DNA to ensure the finding is somatic. We formally analyzed the first 100 patients to undergo EGFR sequence analysis and found that testing was feasible and significantly affected the treatment of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients harboring EGFR mutations were significantly more likely to receive recommendations for therapy with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (i.e., gefitinib or erlotinib) than patients without mutations. However, negative EGFR test results did not prevent physicians from administering these agents to selected patients. Ideally, a standardized technique for mutation testing could be developed, with demonstrated reproducibility and validity. Clinical trials incorporating molecular diagnostics are ongoing to assess the efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as first-line therapy for metastatic NSCLC and as adjuvant therapy for early-stage resected NSCLC. It is likely that mutation testing and other molecular analyses will be most useful in these two clinical situations.

25176975
Germ-line exon 21 EGFR mutations, V843I and P848L, in nonsmall cell lung cancer patients


20049516
Investigating the function of three non-synonymous SNPs in EGFR gene: structural modelling and association with breast cancer
Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) represent common genomic variations that alter protein sequence and function. Some nsSNPs affecting conserved amino acids have been reported to be associated with cancer susceptibility. Interestingly, Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is commonly overexpressed and mutated in many cancers. In this study, we investigated the structural effect of three deleterious nsSNPs: rs17337451 (R962G), rs1140476 (R977C) and rs17290699 (H988P) within EGFR using computational tools. The modelled mutant dimers showed less stability than wild type EGFR dimer. Furthermore, we showed the important role of R962 and H988 residues in the EGFR dimer formation. We also report preliminary experimental data for SNP R977C suggesting that the variant C977 might confer greater risk for breast cancer. These results contribute to an improved understanding of the EGFR dimer stability and provide new elements for understanding the relationship between EGFR and cancer.

27625398
Identification of non-coding genetic variants in samples from hypoxemic respiratory disease patients that affect the transcriptional response to hypoxia
A wide range of diseases course with an unbalance between the consumption of oxygen by tissues and its supply. This situation triggers a transcriptional response, mediated by the hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs), that aims to restore oxygen homeostasis. Little is known about the inter-individual variation in this response and its role in the progression of disease. Herein, we sought to identify common genetic variants mapping to hypoxia response elements (HREs) and characterize their effect on transcription. To this end, we constructed a list of genome-wide HIF-binding regions from publicly available experimental datasets and studied the genetic variability in these regions by targeted re-sequencing of genomic samples from 96 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 144 obstructive sleep apnea patients. This study identified 14 frequent variants disrupting potential HREs. The analysis of the genomic regions containing these variants by means of reporter assays revealed that variants rs1009329, rs6593210 and rs150921338 impaired the transcriptional response to hypoxia. Finally, using genome editing we confirmed the functional role of rs6593210 in the transcriptional regulation of EGFR. In summary, we found that inter-individual variability in non-coding regions affect the response to hypoxia and could potentially impact on the progression of pulmonary diseases.

16885506
Polymorphism in Sp1 recognition site of the EGF receptor gene promoter and risk of glioblastoma
We investigated two polymorphisms of the epidermal growth factor receptor promoter as potential risk factors and prognostic markers for glioblastoma. The -216T allele (which results in a 30% higher activity) was more frequent in the patients compared with the control population (224/376 = 59.6% vs 165/352 = 46.8%; p = 0.0006) corresponding to an odd ratio of 1.67 (1.24; 2.25). A modest difference in median survival was also associated with the TT genotype.

15665278
A functional common polymorphism in a Sp1 recognition site of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene promoter
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays a prominent role in cell growth and development. Its regulation in humans is complex and incompletely understood. In this study, 12 new polymorphisms were discovered in the 5'-regulatory region of EGFR gene and 2 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (-216G/T and -191C/A) were found in the essential promoter area, one of which is located in a Sp1 recognition site (-216). Transient transfection in human cancer and primary cell lines showed significantly different promoter activity between the two most common haplotypes (-216G-191C and -216T-191C). The replacement of G by T at position -216 increases the promoter activity by 30%. A transient transfection assay in the Sp1-deficient cell line (Schneider cell line 2) showed a strong dependence of EGFR promoter activity on Sp1 and confirmed the effect of the aforementioned polymorphisms. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay also showed a significantly higher binding efficiency of nuclear protein or pure Sp1 protein to the T allele compared with the G allele. We then investigated the allelic imbalance of EGFR transcription in fibroblast cell lines with heterozygous genotype at -216G/T but C/C homozygous genotype at -191C/A. The expression of mRNA carrying T-C haplotype was significantly stronger compared with that of G-C haplotype (P < 0.02). Thus, we successfully showed that a common polymorphism in the EGFR promoter was associated with altered promoter activity and gene expression both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings have implications for cancer etiology and therapy and may also be relevant to the inherited susceptibility of other common diseases.

20621735
Epidermal growth factor receptor polymorphisms and risk for toxicity in paediatric patients treated with gefitinib
Purpose:
        
      
      To investigate associations between germline genetic variations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and toxicity in paediatric patients treated with gefitinib.

30470824
The risk variant rs884225 within EGFR impairs miR-103a-3p's anti-tumourigenic function in non-small cell lung cancer
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status is the major determinant of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy selection. Studies have hinted that EGFR antibodies or tyrosine kinase inhibitors were beneficial in patients with EGFR mutation-negative but EGFR-overexpressing of NSCLC. However, the mechanisms underlying EGFR amplification and overexpression in NSCLC remain largely unknown. Here, we report that rs884225, a single nucleotide polymorphism in the EGFR 3'-terminal untranslated region, was significantly associated with EGFR expression level and contributed to NSCLC susceptibility. Mechanistically, the rs884225 C allele enhanced EGFR expression by altering the miR-103a-3p binding site, thus impairing miR-103a-3p's anti-tumourigenic function. As a tumour suppressor gene, miR-103a-3p expression correlated with overall and recurrence-free survival in NSCLC patients. Furthermore, miR-103a-3p inhibited growth and metastasis via effects on the KRAS pathway and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in EGFR wild-type NSCLC cell lines, respectively, which substantially reduced EGFR expression and activity. Thus, rs884225 may be a biomarker for NSCLC susceptibility, and miR-103a-3p may be a potential therapeutic target in NSCLC.

28726809
Genomic diagnostics within a medically underserved population: efficacy and implications
PurposeWe integrated whole-exome sequencing (WES) and chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) into a clinical workflow to serve an endogamous, uninsured, agrarian community.MethodsSeventy-nine probands (newborn to 49.8 years) who presented between 1998 and 2015 remained undiagnosed after biochemical and molecular investigations. We generated WES data for probands and family members and vetted variants through rephenotyping, segregation analyses, and population studies.ResultsThe most common presentation was neurological disease (64%). Seven (9%) probands were diagnosed by CMA. Family WES data were informative for 37 (51%) of the 72 remaining individuals, yielding a specific genetic diagnosis (n = 32) or revealing a novel molecular etiology (n = 5). For five (7%) additional subjects, negative WES decreased the likelihood of genetic disease. Compared to trio analysis, "family" WES (average seven exomes per proband) reduced filtered candidate variants from 22 ± 6 to 5 ± 3 per proband. Nineteen (51%) alleles were de novo and 17 (46%) inherited; the latter added to a population-based diagnostic panel. We found actionable secondary variants in 21 (4.2%) of 502 subjects, all of whom opted to be informed.ConclusionCMA and family-based WES streamline and economize diagnosis of rare genetic disorders, accelerate novel gene discovery, and create new opportunities for community-based screening and prevention in underserved populations.

31028937
Development of a Novel Next-Generation Sequencing Assay for Carrier Screening in Old Order Amish and Mennonite Populations of Pennsylvania
Genetically isolated populations, such as the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonite communities, have an increased incidence of specific autosomal recessive disorders caused by the founder effect. In these populations, robust expanded carrier screening and diagnostic testing have the potential to reduce overall medical costs and improve patient outcomes. A novel next-generation sequencing assay was developed using anchored multiplex PCR technology (ArcherDX) for 162 different genetic syndromes caused by 202 pathogenic variants consisting of 150 single-nucleotide changes, 43 small insertion/deletions, and 9 large deletions (>20 nucleotides). To assess the accuracy of the screening panel results, 48 samples were selected on the basis of prior whole exome sequencing results. An additional 15 samples were chosen specifically to validate SMN1 and SMN2 copy number analyses. Collectively, the screening panel detected 273 pathogenic single-nucleotide or small insertion/deletion variants, 35 copy number variations, and 1 chromosomal abnormality (Klinefelter syndrome). Concordance with prior whole exome sequencing was 100%. By using a novel next-generation sequencing workflow, a successful targeted gene variant panel was developed for the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonite populations of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Population-wide carrier screening may help decrease the morbidity and mortality of these conditions in the high-risk populations.

25017413
EGFR CA repeat polymorphism predict clinical outcome in EGFR mutation positive NSCLC patients treated with erlotinib
Objectives:
        
      
      Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are predictors of efficacy for treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A CA repeat polymorphism in intron 1 of the EGFR gene influences the transcription of the EGFR gene. This study evaluates the association between the CA repeat polymorphism and outcome in NSCLC patients treated with erlotinib.

10224073
Modulation of epidermal growth factor receptor gene transcription by a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat in intron 1
The influence of a highly polymorphic CA dinucleotide repeat in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene on transcription was examined with a quantitative nuclear run-off method. We could demonstrate that transcription of the EGFR gene is inhibited by approximately 80% in alleles with 21 CA repeats. In experiments with polymerase chain reaction products that spanned a region of more than 4,000 base pairs and contained the promoter, two enhancers, and the polymorphic region in the first intron of the gene, we found that transcription activity declines with increasing numbers of CA dinucleotides. In vivo pre-mRNA expression data from cultured cell lines support these findings, although other regulation mechanisms can outweigh this effect. In addition, we showed that under our experimental conditions RNA elongation terminates at a site closely downstream of the simple sequence repeat and that there are two separate major transcription start sites. Our results provide new insights in individually different EGFR gene expression and the role of the CA repeat in transcription of this proto-oncogene.

21292812
Functional EGFR germline polymorphisms may confer risk for EGFR somatic mutations in non-small cell lung cancer, with a predominant effect on exon 19 microdeletions
Somatic mutations in the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain play a critical role in the development and treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Strong genetic influence on susceptibility to these mutations has been suggested. To identify the genetic factors conferring risk for the EGFR tyrosine kinase mutations in NSCLC, a case-control study was conducted in 141 Taiwanese NSCLC patients by focusing on three functional polymorphisms in the EGFR gene [-216G/T, intron 1 (CA)n, and R497K]. Allelic imbalance of the EGFR -216G/T polymorphism was also tested in the heterozygous patients and in the NCI-60 cancer cell lines to further verify its function. We found that the frequencies of the alleles -216T and CA-19 are significantly higher in the patients with any mutation (P = 0.032 and 0.01, respectively), in particular in those with exon 19 microdeletions (P = 0.006 and 0.033, respectively), but not in the patients with L858R mutation. The -216T allele is favored to be amplified in both tumor DNA of lung cancer patients and cancer cell lines. We conclude that the local haplotype structures across the EGFR gene may favor the development of cellular malignancies and thus significantly confer risk to the occurrence of EGFR mutations in NSCLC, particularly the exon 19 microdeletions.

17219440
Association of the EGFR intron 1 CA repeat length with lung cancer risk
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays an important role in the development and progression of lung cancer. A previous report noted that an increased number of polymorphic CA repeats in the first intron of the EGFR gene results in decreased transcriptional activity. To estimate the association of the length of polymorphic CA repeats in intron 1 of the EGFR gene with lung cancer, a case-control study of 176 lung cancer patients and 161 controls was conducted in Caucasians. This case-control study is based on two existing prospective cohorts: the Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) and the Lung Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) at the University of Pittsburgh. The frequencies of the SL (one allele>16 repeats), and SS (both allele<or=16 repeats) genotypes were statistically higher among the cases than in the controls (OR: 1.94 and 3.04, 95% CI: 1.16-3.23 and 1.53-6.04, P-value: 0.01 and 0.001, respectively). When the length of EGFR-CA repeat was analyzed by the sum of the number of repeats in two alleles, the frequency of the shorter repeats (sum<or=36) was 79.6% versus 63.4%, respectively, and the frequency of the longer repeats (sum>36) was 20.5% versus 36.7%, for lung cancer cases versus controls. The lower sum of EGFR-CA repeats associated with the risk of lung cancer; the estimated odds ratio was 2.25 with 95% confidence interval: 1.38-3.66 (P=0.001). Associations involving EGFR-CA repeat genotype and EGFR-CA repeat sum remained significant when adjusted for age, gender, and tobacco exposure. Our study, which is preliminary, demonstrates for the first time that shorter EGFR-CA repeats associate with lung cancer risk. The number of EGFR-CA repeats identifies a possible susceptible population to lung cancer.

28944238
Targeted sequencing of 36 known or putative colorectal cancer susceptibility genes
Background:
        
      
      Mutations in several genes predispose to colorectal cancer. Genetic testing for hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes was previously limited to single gene tests; thus, only a very limited number of genes were tested, and rarely those infrequently mutated in colorectal cancer. Next-generation sequencing technologies have made it possible to sequencing panels of genes known and suspected to influence colorectal cancer susceptibility.

28861920
Higher-than-expected population prevalence of potentially pathogenic germline TP53 variants in individuals unselected for cancer history
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal-dominant cancer predisposition disorder associated with pathogenic germline variants in TP53, with a high penetrance over an individual's lifetime. The actual population prevalence of pathogenic germline TP53 mutations is still unclear, most likely due to biased selection of cancer affected families. The aim of this study was to estimate the population prevalence of potentially pathogenic TP53 exonic variants in three sequencing databases, totaling 63,983 unrelated individuals. Potential pathogenicity was defined using an original algorithm combining bioinformatic prediction tools, suggested clinical significance, and functional data. We identified 34 different potentially pathogenic TP53 variants in 131 out of 63,983 individuals (0.2%). Twenty-eight (82%) of these variants fell within the DNA-binding domain of TP53, with an enrichment for specific variants that were not previously identified as LFS mutation hotspots, such as the p.R290H and p.N235S variants. Our findings reveal that the population prevalence of potentially pathogenic TP53 variants may be up to 10 times higher than previously estimated from family-based studies. These results point to the need for further studies aimed at evaluating cancer penetrance modifiers as well as the risk associated between cancer and rare TP53 variants.

30287823
Germline pathogenic variants of 11 breast cancer genes in 7,051 Japanese patients and 11,241 controls
Pathogenic variants in highly penetrant genes are useful for the diagnosis, therapy, and surveillance for hereditary breast cancer. Large-scale studies are needed to inform future testing and variant classification processes in Japanese. We performed a case-control association study for variants in coding regions of 11 hereditary breast cancer genes in 7051 unselected breast cancer patients and 11,241 female controls of Japanese ancestry. Here, we identify 244 germline pathogenic variants. Pathogenic variants are found in 5.7% of patients, ranging from 15% in women diagnosed <40 years to 3.2% in patients ≥80 years, with BRCA1/2, explaining two-thirds of pathogenic variants identified at all ages. BRCA1/2, PALB2, and TP53 are significant causative genes. Patients with pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 or PTEN have significantly younger age at diagnosis. In conclusion, BRCA1/2, PALB2, and TP53 are the major hereditary breast cancer genes, irrespective of age at diagnosis, in Japanese women.

33245408
TP53 germline mutations in the context of families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer: a clinical challenge
Purpose:
        
      
      TP53germline (g) mutations, associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), have rarely been reported in the context of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). The prevalence and cancer risks in this target group are unknown and counseling remains challenging. Notably an extensive high-risk surveillance program is implemented, which evokes substantial psychological discomfort. Emphasizing the lack of consensus about clinical implications, we aim to further characterize TP53g mutations in HBOC families.

25525159
RNA splicing. The human splicing code reveals new insights into the genetic determinants of disease
To facilitate precision medicine and whole-genome annotation, we developed a machine-learning technique that scores how strongly genetic variants affect RNA splicing, whose alteration contributes to many diseases. Analysis of more than 650,000 intronic and exonic variants revealed widespread patterns of mutation-driven aberrant splicing. Intronic disease mutations that are more than 30 nucleotides from any splice site alter splicing nine times as often as common variants, and missense exonic disease mutations that have the least impact on protein function are five times as likely as others to alter splicing. We detected tens of thousands of disease-causing mutations, including those involved in cancers and spinal muscular atrophy. Examination of intronic and exonic variants found using whole-genome sequencing of individuals with autism revealed misspliced genes with neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Our approach provides evidence for causal variants and should enable new discoveries in precision medicine.

30720243
High prevalence of cancer-associated TP53 variants in the gnomAD database: A word of caution concerning the use of variant filtering
The 1,000 genome project, the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) or the Genome Aggregation database (gnomAD) datasets, were developed to provide large-scale reference data of genetic variations for various populations to filter out common benign variants and identify rare variants of clinical importance based on their frequency in the human population. Using a TP53 repository of 80,000 cancer variants, as well as TP53 variants from multiple cancer genome projects, we have defined a set of certified oncogenic TP53 variants. This specific set has been independently validated by functional and in silico predictive analysis. Here we show that a significant number of these variants are included in gnomAD and ExAC. Most of them correspond to TP53 hotspot variants occurring as somatic and germline events in human cancer. Similarly, disease-associated variants for five other tumor suppressor genes, including BRCA1, BRCA2, APC, PTEN, and MLH1, have also been identified. This study demonstrates that germline TP53 variants in the human population are more frequent than previously thought. Furthermore, population databases such as gnomAD or ExAC must be used with caution and need to be annotated for the presence of oncogenic variants to improve their clinical utility.

31321604
TP53 variants of uncertain significance: increasing challenges in variant interpretation and genetic counseling
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and Li-Fraumeni Like (LFL) are autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndromes caused by pathogenic germline variants in the TP53 gene. Recent studies have shown that the incorporation of next-generation sequencing by using multigene panels in clinical practice has resulted in the frequent identification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Given that there is no established medical management for VUS carriers, the identification of these variants may cause confusion and anxiety for both patients and practitioners. Herein, we aimed to verify VUS frequency and review VUS classification and interpretation in 1844 patients submitted for comprehensive germline TP53 testing independent of clinical criteria. Variant characterization was done assessing clinical information whenever available, variant frequency in population databases, pathogenicity predictions using in silico tools and previous functional studies. All variants were classified based on the guidelines proposed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (2015) and by the Sherloc framework (2017). Of the twelve VUS (0.65%) identified in TP53, two were classified as likely pathogenic and two were classified as likely benign after re-evaluation, potentially resulting in significant management modification for the proband and relatives. This report cases highlights the challenges and impact of TP53 variant interpretation especially when there is no clear LFS/LFL phenotype.

15851479
The codon 47 polymorphism in p53 is functionally significant
In addition to a common polymorphism at codon 72, the p53 tumor suppressor gene also contains a rare single nucleotide polymorphism at amino acid 47. Wild type p53 encodes proline at this residue, but in <5% of African Americans, this amino acid is serine. Notably, phosphorylation of the adjacent serine 46 by the proline-directed kinase p38 MAPK is known to greatly enhance the ability of p53 to induce apoptosis. Here we showed that the serine 47 polymorphic variant, which replaces the proline residue necessary for recognition by proline-directed kinases, is a markedly poorer substrate for phosphorylation on serine 46 by p38 MAPK. Consistent with this finding, we showed that the serine 47 variant has up to 5-fold decreased ability to induce apoptosis compared with wild type p53. Mechanistically, we found that this variant has decreased ability to transactivate two p53 target genes, p53AIP1 and PUMA, but not other p53 response genes; this is the first time that phosphorylation of serine 46 has been implicated in transactivation of PUMA by p53. Down-regulation of PUMA in cells with wild type p53 using short interfering RNAs reduced apoptosis in these cells to a level comparable to that in cells containing the serine 47 variant. The combined data indicated that, like the codon 72 polymorphism, the codon 47 polymorphism of p53 is functionally significant and may play a role in cancer risk, progression, and the efficacy of therapy.

12826609
Understanding the function-structure and function-mutation relationships of p53 tumor suppressor protein by high-resolution missense mutation analysis
Inactivation of the tumor suppressor p53 by missense mutations is the most frequent genetic alteration in human cancers. The common missense mutations in the TP53 gene disrupt the ability of p53 to bind to DNA and consequently to transactivate downstream genes. However, it is still not fully understood how a large number of the remaining mutations affect p53 structure and function. Here, we used a comprehensive site-directed mutagenesis technique and a yeast-based functional assay to construct, express, and evaluate 2,314 p53 mutants representing all possible amino acid substitutions caused by a point mutation throughout the protein (5.9 substitutions per residue), and correlated p53 function with structure- and tumor-derived mutations. This high-resolution mutation analysis allows evaluation of previous predictions and hypotheses through interrelation of function, structure and mutation.

19165225
p53 polymorphisms: cancer implications
The normal functioning of p53 is a potent barrier to cancer. Tumour-associated mutations in TP53, typically single nucleotide substitutions in the coding sequence, are a hallmark of most human cancers and cause dramatic defects in p53 function. By contrast, only a small fraction, if any, of the >200 naturally occurring sequence variations (single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) of TP53 in human populations are expected to cause measurable perturbation of p53 function. Polymorphisms in the TP53 locus that might have cancer-related phenotypical manifestations are the subject of this Review. Polymorphic variants of other genes in the p53 pathway, such as MDM2, which might have biological consequences either individually or in combination with p53 variants are also discussed.

27545002
Prevalence of low-penetrant germline TP53 D49H mutation in Japanese cancer patients
Using whole exome sequencing data obtained from 1,685 Japanese cancer patients, we examined genetic variations of germline TP53 and found 10 types of non-synonymous single nucleotide variants. In the present study, we focused on 6 patients with germline D49H mutation located in the transactivation domain 2 of p53 protein, since the mutation seemed to be prevalent in cancer patients and to be pathogenic. According to the initial survey for family history of the proband with the germline TP53 D49H mutation, one osteosarcoma patient and his pedigree fulfill the criteria for Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome and the 2009 Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation screening. Since this patient possesses double germline mutations of TP53 D49H and A159D, further studies are required to evaluate contribution of the D49H mutation in this morbidity. The remaining 5 patients had family histories of cancer, but none fulfills the criteria either for the Li-Fraumeni/Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes or the 2009 Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation screening. It is possible to postulate that the germline TP53 D49H mutation is likely to be low-penetrant in some pedigrees. The present study also indicates that the survey for the germline TP53 mutation plays an important role in clinical practice as it will prevent mistaking cancer patients with unusual heredities for sporadic cases.

28902083
Nodular Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma in a 15-Year-Old Boy With Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Having a Germline TP53 D49H Mutation
Germline mutations in TP53 are the primary cause of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Most mutations are reported within the DNA-binding domain. We report a case of a 15-year-old boy with LFS who developed early-stage nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, a rare subtype of Hodgkin lymphomas. His sister was diagnosed with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma at the age of 1.5 years. Sequence analysis revealed a germline mutation in the transactivation domain of TP53, c.145G>C (p.D49H), in the patient, his sister, and father. One family with LFS with a germline TP53 D49H mutation has previously been reported. This report supports the pathogenicity of this mutation.

18246963
Early-onset of sporadic basal-cell carcinoma: germline mutations in the TP53, PTCH, and XPD genes
Background:
        
      
      Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common non-melanoma skin cancer in the Western world. The objective of this study was to examine together germline mutations in the TP53, PTCH, and XPD genes as risk factors for developing BCC at a young age. We hypothesized that mutations in these genes significantly increase the risk of early-onset BCC (< or = 35 years).

30032850
Germline mutations in young non-smoking women with lung adenocarcinoma
Objectives:
        
      
      Although the primary cause of lung cancer is smoking, a considerable proportion of all lung cancers occur in never smokers. Gender influences the risk and characteristics of lung cancer and women are overrepresented among never smokers with the disease. Young age at onset and lack of established environmental risk factors suggest genetic predisposition. In this study, we used population-based sampling of young patients to discover candidate predisposition variants for lung adenocarcinoma in never-smoking women.

32283892
Spectrum of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations in Turkish colorectal cancer patients: a single center study
Background/aim:
        
      
      Quarter of colorectal cancer patients have a family history and 6% of these comprise hereditary cancer syndromes. For developing national health strategies for genetic screening, it is crucial to determine the spectrum of damaging alterations in causative genes and to describe frequent founder mutations.

29752822
Germline mutations in 40 cancer susceptibility genes among Chinese patients with high hereditary risk breast cancer
Multigene panel testing of breast cancer predisposition genes have been extensively conducted in Europe and America, which is relatively rare in Asia however. In this study, we assessed the frequency of germline mutations in 40 cancer predisposition genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, among a large cohort of Chinese patients with high hereditary risk of BC. From 2015 to 2016, consecutive BC patients from 26 centers of China with high hereditary risk were recruited (n = 937). Clinical information was collected and next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using blood samples of participants to identify germline mutations. In total, we acquired 223 patients with putative germline mutations, including 159 in BRCA1/2, 61 in 15 other BC susceptibility genes and 3 in both BRCA1/2 and non-BRCA1/2 gene. Major mutant non-BRCA1/2 genes were TP53 (n = 18), PALB2 (n = 11), CHEK2 (n = 6), ATM (n = 6) and BARD1 (n = 5). No factors predicted pathologic mutations in non-BRCA1/2 genes when treated as a whole. TP53 mutations were associated with HER-2 positive BC and younger age at diagnosis; and CHEK2 and PALB2 mutations were enriched in patients with luminal BC. Among high hereditary risk Chinese BC patients, 23.8% contained germline mutations, including 6.8% in non-BRCA1/2 genes. TP53 and PALB2 had a relatively high mutation rate (1.9 and 1.2%). Although no factors predicted for detrimental mutations in non-BRCA1/2 genes, some clinical features were associated with mutations of several particular genes.

21761402
Early onset HER2-positive breast cancer is associated with germline TP53 mutations
Background:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations predispose to early onset breast cancer in women and are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Published data on the pathological characteristics of breast cancer among women with TP53 mutations is limited.

30274973
High Prevalence of Hereditary Cancer Syndromes and Outcomes in Adults with Early-Onset Pancreatic Cancer
Introduction: We aimed to determine the prevalence and landscape of germline mutations among patients with young-onset pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) as well as their influence in prognosis.Methods: Patients from two cohorts were studied, the high-risk cohort (HRC), which included 584 PDAC patients who received genetic counseling at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, and a general cohort (GC) with 233 metastatic PDAC patients. We defined germline DNA sequencing on 13 known pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes. The prevalence and landscape of mutations were determined, and clinical characteristics including survival were analyzed.Results: A total of 409 patients underwent genetic testing (277 from HRC and 132 from GC). As expected, the HRC had higher prevalence of germline mutations compared with the GC: 17.3% versus 6.81%. The most common mutations in both cohorts were in BRCA1/2 and mismatch-repair (MMR) genes. Patients younger than 60 years old had significantly higher prevalence of germline mutations in both the HRC [odds ratios (OR), 1.93 ± 1.03-3.70, P = 0.039] and GC (4.78 ± 1.10-32.95, P = 0.036). Furthermore, PDAC patients with germline mutations in the GC had better overall survival than patients without mutations (HR, 0.44; 95% CI of HR, 0.25-0.76, P = 0.030).Discussion: Germline mutations are highly prevalent in patients with PDAC of early onset and can be predictive of better outcomes. Considering emerging screening strategies for relatives carrying susceptibility genes as well as impact on therapy choices, genetic counseling and testing should be encouraged in PDAC patients, particularly those of young onset. Cancer Prev Res; 11(11); 679-86. ©2018 AACR.

30709875
Hematologic malignancies and Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant condition associated with a high risk of a broad range of childhood- and adult-onset cancers. LFS is related to germline mutations of the tumor-suppressor gene TP53 The most common reported leukemia associated with LFS is hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia, but myeloid malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) are also reported, often in the setting of therapy-related disease. We reviewed the clinicopathologic characteristics including cytogenetics and molecular analysis for seven adult patients with LFS and hematologic malignancies evaluated at the Hereditary Hematologic Malignancy Clinic (HHMC) at MD Anderson Cancer Center. We present this LFS review series to increase awareness of LFS for the appropriate diagnosis of both patients and potentially affected relatives, as well as provide experience with patient outcomes in this difficult to treat population.

8625447
Analysis of a germ line polymorphism of the p53 gene in lung cancer patients; discrete results with smoking history
The p53 tumor suppressor gene is often mutated in various human cancers and a common polymorphism is known at codon 72 of exon 4, with two alleles encoding either arginine (CGC) or proline (CCC). Association of this polymorphism with any human cancer susceptibility has yet to be clarified. We have conducted a case-control study in Japan on the distribution of the three genotypes with 191 lung cancer patients, 152 control patients with non-cancerous pulmonary diseases and 115 colorectal cancer patients. The genotypes were examined by PCR using DNA samples from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Frequency distributions of the three genotypes were quite comparable with each other among groups, with allelic frequencies of approximately 60% for arginine and 40% for proline. The genotypic frequencies in lung cancer patients, however, were largely different between smokers and non-smokers (chi 2 = 13.5, df = 2, P < 0.001). Compared with the control and colorectal cancer patients a significant difference in genotypic frequency was observed only in non-smoker lung cancers (chi 2 = 10.9, df = 2, P < 0.01), with an excess of Arg/Arg homozygotes and a deficit of Arg/Pro heterozygotes. Our present data suggest that the p53 polymorphism affects the risk of lung cancer unrelated to smoking.

9607760
Role of a p53 polymorphism in the development of human papillomavirus-associated cancer
The E6 oncoprotein derived from tumour-associated human papillomaviruses (HPVs) binds to and induces the degradation of the cellular tumour-suppressor protein p53. A common polymorphism that occurs in the p53 amino-acid sequence results in the presence of either a proline or an arginine at position 72. The effect of this polymorphism on the susceptibility of p53 to E6-mediated degradation has been investigated and the arginine form of p53 was found to be significantly more susceptible than the proline form. Moreover, allelic analysis of patients with HPV-associated tumours revealed a striking overrepresentation of homozygous arginine-72 p53 compared with the normal population, which indicated that individuals homozygous for arginine 72 are about seven times more susceptible to HPV-associated tumorigenesis than heterozygotes. The arginine-encoding allele therefore represents a significant risk factor in the development of HPV-associated cancers.

9891044
Two polymorphic variants of wild-type p53 differ biochemically and biologically
The wild-type p53 protein exhibits a common polymorphism at amino acid 72, resulting in either a proline residue (p53Pro) or an arginine residue (p53Arg) at this position. Despite the difference that this change makes in the primary structure of the protein resulting in a difference in migration during sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, no differences in the biochemical or biological characteristics of these wild-type p53 variants have been reported. We have recently shown that p53Arg is significantly more susceptible than p53Pro to the degradation induced by human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 protein. Moreover, this may result in an increased susceptibility to HPV-induced tumors in homozygous p53Arg individuals. In further investigating the characteristics of these p53 variants, we now show that both forms are morphologically wild type and do not differ in their ability to bind to DNA in a sequence-specific manner. However, there are a number of differences between the p53 variants in their abilities to bind components of the transcriptional machinery, to activate transcription, to induce apoptosis, and to repress the transformation of primary cells. These observations may have implications for the development of cancers which harbor wild-type p53 sequences and possibly for the ability of such tumors to respond to therapy, depending on their p53 genotype.

8710380
A novel p53 germline alteration identified in a late onset breast cancer kindred
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, characterized by childhood sarcoma, leukemia and early onset breast cancer and has occasionally been found also in familial breast-ovarian cancer. Most mutations found are of missense type and located in the central region of the gene (exons 5 to 8). In the present study, a germline p53 alteration was identified in a late onset breast cancer family (kindred Lund 5; mean age 58 years) using single stranded conformation polymorphism and sequence analysis. The mutation (a CCG to CTG transition) at codon 82 in exon 4, resulting in a proline to leucine substitution, has not previously been reported and was not present in a control set of 60 healthy individuals. Three of five woman with breast cancer (45, 57 and 65 years) were carriers of the alteration. Loss of heterozygosity at the p53 locus was not seen in the primary tumors of these women, but appeared as a partial loss of the wildtype allele in subsequent recurrent lesions of two gene carriers. The family manifested no linkage to the p53 gene (a two-point LOD-score of -0.41), and has previously also been excluded for linkage to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 loci, as well as being carrier of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Although it seems unlikely that the p53 germline mutation is the major cause of disease predisposition in Lund 5, the data suggest that some p53 alteration may confer a subtle influence on breast cancer development and progression.

17606709
Transcriptional functionality of germ line p53 mutants influences cancer phenotype
Purpose:
        
      
      The TP53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a sequence-specific transcription factor that is able to transactivate several sets of genes, the promoters of which include appropriate response elements. Although human cancers frequently contain mutated p53, the alleles as well as the clinical expression are often heterogeneous. Germ line mutations of TP53 result in cancer proneness syndromes known as Li-Fraumeni, Li-Fraumeni--like, and nonsyndromic predisposition with or without family history. p53 mutants can be classified as partial deficiency alleles or severe deficiency alleles depending on their ability to transactivate a set of human target sequences, as measured using a standardized yeast-based assay (see http://www.umd.be:2072/index.html). We have investigated the extent to which the functional features of p53 mutant alleles determine clinical features in patients who have inherited these alleles and have developed cancer.

20128691
Analysis of the DNA-binding activity of p53 mutants using functional protein microarrays and its relationship to transcriptional activation
Sequence-specific DNA binding is the key function through which tumor suppressor p53 exerts transactivation of the downstream target genes, often being impaired in cancer cells by mutations in the TP53 gene. Functional protein microarray technology enables a high-throughput parallel analysis of protein properties within one experiment under the same conditions. Using an array approach, we analyzed the DNA binding activity of wild type p53 protein and of 49 variants. Our results show significant differences in the binding properties between the p53 mutants. The C-terminal mutant R337C displayed the highest DNA binding activity on the array. However, the same mutant showed only a partial activation in the reporter gene assay and almost no activation of downstream target genes after transfection of expression vector into cells lacking endogenous p53. These observations demonstrate that DNA binding itself is not sufficient for activating the p53 target genes in at least some of the p53 mutants and, therefore, in vitro studies might not always reflect in vivo conditions.

31060593
Frequency of pathogenic germline variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2 and TP53 in ductal carcinoma in situ diagnosed in women under the age of 50 years
Introduction:
        
      
      Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-obligate precursor of invasive ductal breast cancer, and approximately 20% of screen-detected tumours are pure DCIS. Most risk factors for breast cancer have similar associations with DCIS and IDC; however, there is limited data on the prevalence of the known high and moderate penetrance breast cancer predisposition genes in DCIS and which women with DCIS should be referred for genetic screening. The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of germline variants in BRCA2, BRCA1, CHEK2, PALB2 and TP53 in DCIS in women aged less than 50 years of age.

26681312
Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variant prevalence among the first 10,000 patients referred for next-generation cancer panel testing
Purpose:
        
      
      Germ-line testing for panels of cancer genes using next-generation sequencing is becoming more common in clinical care. We report our experience as a clinical laboratory testing both well-established, high-risk cancer genes (e.g., BRCA1/2, MLH1, MSH2) as well as more recently identified cancer genes (e.g., PALB2, BRIP1), many of which have increased but less well-defined penetrance.

15381368
Identification of novel TP53 mutations in familial and sporadic cancer cases of German and Swiss origin
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare cancer syndrome caused by mutations in the TP53 gene. A number of tumor-associated germline mutations have been described in individuals from various ethnic origins although, thus far, none in affected individuals of German descent. Our work aimed to detect germline mutations in the TP53 gene in five index cases of German and Swiss origin with cancers typical of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We analyzed all ten coding exons of the TP53 gene by direct sequencing of PCR products. We identified five mutations of which three were found in families with a strong history of LFS in several generations while two likely came about de novo. The five mutations include two missense mutations in exon 4 (Gly105Cys) and exon 7 (Arg248Gln), one deletion of 11 base pairs encompassing the splice acceptor sequence of exon 6 (IVS5-11_-1 del), one nonsense mutation in exon 6 (Arg196Stop), and one duplication of 4 base pairs in exon 8 (1020_1023dupCTGC). The functional consequence of the IVS5-11_-1del mutation on splicing of pre-mRNA was investigated by an in vitro assay. Our study reports the first germline mutations in patients of German and Swiss origin with LFS-related tumors. The frequent identification of de novo germline mutations emphasizes the importance of mutational analyses of the TP53 gene particularly in young patients with malignancies typical for LFS, but without a positive family history of this tumor syndrome.

29470806
Screening of over 1000 Indian patients with breast and/or ovarian cancer with a multi-gene panel: prevalence of BRCA1/2 and non-BRCA mutations
Purpose:
        
      
      Breast and/or ovarian cancers are among the most common cancers in women across the world. In the Indian population, the healthcare burden of breast and/or ovarian cancers has been steadily rising, thus stressing the need for early detection, surveillance, and disease management measures. However, the burden attributable to inherited mutations is not well characterized.

11518751
Germline p53 mutation in a patient with multiple primary cancers
We report a case of multiple primary cancers having a germline missense mutation of the p53 gene. The patient was a Japanese female and had a history of five different types of cancers. PCR/direct sequencing analysis revealed the presence of a nucleotide substitution, AGC (Ser) to AGG (Arg), at codon 106 of the p53 gene in DNA from non-cancerous breast tissue. This is the first case of germline p53 mutation at codon 106, and could contribute to establishing correlations between the types and locations of germline p53 mutations and their phenotypical consequences.

26580448
Germline Mutations in Predisposition Genes in Pediatric Cancer
Background:
        
      
      The prevalence and spectrum of predisposing mutations among children and adolescents with cancer are largely unknown. Knowledge of such mutations may improve the understanding of tumorigenesis, direct patient care, and enable genetic counseling of patients and families.

31081129
Functional characterization of novel germline TP53 variants in Swedish families
Pathogenic germline TP53 variants predispose to a wide range of early onset cancers, often recognized as the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). They are also identified in 1% of families with hereditary breast cancer (HrBC) that do not fulfill the criteria for LFS. In this study, we present a total of 24 different TP53 variants identified in 31 Swedish families with LFS or HrBC. Ten of these variants, nine exonic and one splice, have previously not been described as germline pathogenic variants. The nine exonic variants were functionally characterized and demonstrated partial transactivation activity compared to wild-type p53. Some show nuclear localization similar to wild-type p53 while others possess cytoplasmic or perinuclear localization. The four frameshift variants (W91Gfs*32, L111 Wfs*12, S227 Lfs*20 and S240Kfs*25) had negligible, while F134 L and T231del had low level of p53 activity. The L111 Wfs*12 and T231del variants are also deficient for induction of apoptosis. The missense variant R110C retain p53 effects and the nonsense E349* shows at least partial transcription factor activity but has reduced ability to trigger apoptosis. This is the first functional characterization of novel germline TP53 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in the Swedish cohort as an attempt to understand its association with LFS and HrBC, respectively.

23580068
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in HER2+ breast cancer patients
Breast cancer is the most frequent tumor in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a rare inherited cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Recent data show that breast cancer in germline TP53 mutation carriers is commonly HER2+ (63-83 %). We assessed the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a cohort of women with HER2+ breast cancer diagnosed age ≤50 years. We identified blood specimens from 213 women with primary invasive HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years from a single center. Exon grouping analysis sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification techniques were used to screen for germline TP53 mutations. Among 213 women with HER2+ breast cancer age ≤50 years, 3 (ages at diagnosis 23, 32, 44 years) were found to carry a TP53 mutation (1.4 %, 95 % CI 0.3-4.1 %). ER/PR status was not uniform. Two TP53 carriers met Chompret criteria for LFS; none met classic LFS criteria. Although two-thirds of breast cancers in women with TP53 mutations are HER2+, we observed a low prevalence of germline TP53 mutations among unselected young women with HER2+ breast cancer. Given the potential clinical impact, consideration of germline TP53 testing should be given to young women with HER2+ breast cancer, especially if family cancer history is notable.

31016814
Concern regarding classification of germline TP53 variants as likely pathogenic


9667734
Comprehensive mutational scanning of the p53 coding region by two-dimensional gene scanning
A comprehensive mutational scanning test for the p53 coding region based on multiplex PCR and two-dimensional DNA electrophoresis was designed and evaluated. In a 2-step multiplex PCR, the p53 coding region (exons 2-11) was amplified as a single 8646-bp fragment by long-distance PCR in step one. This fragment served as a template for the subsequent co-amplification of the individual exons in two multiplex groups in step two. The multiplex products were then separated, first on the basis of size in non-denaturant polyacrylamide gels and then on the basis of sequence by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Primers for optimal PCR, melting behavior and 2-D gel distribution were designed using a recently developed computer program. The resulting two-dimensional gene scanning (TDGS) test was evaluated by screening, in a blinded fashion, 29 coded DNA samples from Li-Fraumeni syndrome patients with previously identified germline mutations. All mutations were correctly detected. This assay provides an accurate, cost-effective and non-radioactive method for simultaneous mutational scanning of all p53 coding exons.

28152038
Exome sequencing covers >98% of mutations identified on targeted next generation sequencing panels
Background:
        
      
      With the expanded availability of next generation sequencing (NGS)-based clinical genetic tests, clinicians seeking to test patients with Mendelian diseases must weigh the superior coverage of targeted gene panels with the greater number of genes included in whole exome sequencing (WES) when considering their first-tier testing approach. Here, we use an in silico analysis to predict the analytic sensitivity of WES using pathogenic variants identified on targeted NGS panels as a reference.

21552135
Gastric cancer in individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Purpose:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare hereditary cancer syndrome associated with germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Although sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemias, breast and adrenal cortical carcinomas are typically recognized as Li-Fraumeni syndrome-associated tumors, the occurrence of gastrointestinal neoplasms has not been fully evaluated. In this analysis, we investigated the frequency and characteristics of gastric cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

23894400
High frequency of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective adult-onset sarcoma cohort
Sarcomas are a key feature of Li-Fraumeni and related syndromes (LFS/LFL), associated with germline TP53 mutations. Current penetrance estimates for TP53 mutations are subject to significant ascertainment bias. The International Sarcoma Kindred Study is a clinic-based, prospective cohort of adult-onset sarcoma cases, without regard to family history. The entire cohort was screened for mutations in TP53 using high-resolution melting analysis and Sanger sequencing, and multiplex-ligation-dependent probe amplification and targeted massively parallel sequencing for copy number changes. Pathogenic TP53 mutations were detected in blood DNA of 20/559 sarcoma probands (3.6%); 17 were germline and 3 appeared to be somatically acquired. Of the germline carriers, one appeared to be mosaic, detectable in the tumor and blood, but not epithelial tissues. Germline mutation carriers were more likely to have multiple cancers (47% vs 15% for non-carriers, P = 3.0×10(-3)), and earlier cancer onset (33 vs 48 years, P = 1.19×10(-3)). The median survival of mutation carriers following first cancer diagnosis was not significantly different from non-carriers. Only 10/17 (59%) pedigrees met classical or Chompret criteria for LFS. In summary, germline TP53 mutations are not rare in adult patients with sarcoma, with implications for screening, surveillance, treatment and genetic counselling of carriers and family members.

33674644
Prevalence of germline pathogenic variants in 22 cancer susceptibility genes in Swedish pediatric cancer patients
Up to 10% of pediatric cancer patients harbor pathogenic germline variants in one or more cancer susceptibility genes. A recent study from the US reported pathogenic variants in 22 out of 60 analyzed autosomal dominant cancer susceptibility genes, implicating 8.5% of pediatric cancer patients. Here we aimed to assess the prevalence of germline pathogenic variants in these 22 genes in a population-based Swedish cohort and to compare the results to those described in other populations. We found pathogenic variants in 10 of the 22 genes covering 3.8% of these patients. The prevalence of TP53 mutations was significantly lower than described in previous studies, which can largely be attributed to differences in tumor diagnosis distributions across the three cohorts. Matched family history for relatives allowed assessment of familial cancer incidence, however, no significant difference in cancer incidence was found in families of children carrying pathogenic variants compared to those who did not.

1565143
Prevalence and spectrum of germline mutations of the p53 gene among patients with sarcoma
Background:
        
      
      Recent studies have identified germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of sarcomas of bone and soft tissue, breast cancer, and other tumors. In this report, we address the possibility that some sporadic sarcomas may be associated with new germline mutations of the p53 gene, which would not be manifested as familial cancer unless the patient survived to reproduce.

31119730
Prevalence and clinical impact of TP53 germline mutations in Chinese women with breast cancer
The prevalence and clinical relevance of TP53 germline mutations in a large unselected breast cancer series are largely unknown. Here, we determined TP53 germline mutations in a large cohort of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients through multigene panel-based next-generation and/or Sanger sequencing assays. We found that 0.5% of patients (50 cases) carried a pathogenic TP53 germline mutation in this large series of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients, and the prevalence of TP53 germline mutation was 3.8% in very early onset breast cancer (age ≤30 years) in this large cohort. TP53 mutation carriers were significantly more likely to have early onset cancer (p < 0.001) and bilateral breast cancer (p = 0.03), they and were significantly more likely to respond to carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared to anthracycline- or taxane-based regimen in terms of pathologic complete response (50% vs. 0%, p = 0.006). At the median follow-up of 54 months, TP53 mutation was an independent unfavorable factor for recurrence-free survival (RFS), distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS), and overall survival (OS) (RFS, adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 2.24, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.15-4.33, p = 0.02; DRFS, adjusted HR: 2.73, 95% CI: 1.41-5.30, p = 0.003; OS, adjusted HR: 4.60, 95% CI: 2.26-9.41, p < 0.001) in multivariate analyses. Our study suggested that TP53 germline mutations occur more frequently in very early onset unselected breast cancer patients; and TP53 germline mutation carriers have a very poor survival and may benefit from carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in unselected breast cancer patients.

22233476
Childhood adrenocortical carcinoma as a sentinel cancer for detecting families with germline TP53 mutations
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant, autosomal dominant disorder where affected individuals carry a 50% risk of developing cancer before 30 years of age. It is most commonly associated with mutations in the tumour suppressor gene, TP53. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a very rare paediatric cancer, and up to 80% of affected children are found to carry germline TP53 mutations. Hence, we propose using childhood ACC incidence as selection criteria for referral for TP53 mutation testing, independent of familial cancer history. Under the auspices of the Malaysian Society of Paediatric Haematology-Oncology, four eligible children diagnosed with ACC over a 30-month study period were referred for mutation testing. Three had a germline TP53 mutation. Subsequent TP53 testing in relatives showed two inherited mutations and one de novo mutation. These findings strongly support paediatric ACC as a useful sentinel cancer for initiating a germline TP53/LFS detection programme, particularly in countries where the lack of structured oncogenetic practice precludes the identification of families with LFS features.

20127978
Genetic diagnosis of familial breast cancer using clonal sequencing
Using conventional Sanger sequencing as a reference standard, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, and capacity of the Illumina GA II platform for the detection of TP53, BRCA1, and BRCA2 mutations in established tumor cell lines and DNA from patients with germline mutations. A total of 656 coding variants were identified in four cell lines and 65 patient DNAs. All of the known pathogenic mutations (including point mutations and insertions/deletions of up to 16 nucleotides) were identified, using a combination of the Illumina data analysis pipeline with custom and commercial sequence alignment software. In our configuration, clonal sequencing outperforms current diagnostic methods, providing a reduction in analysis times and in reagent costs compared with conventional sequencing. These improvements open the possibility of BRCA1/2 testing for a wider spectrum of at-risk women, and will allow the genetic classification of tumors prior to the use of novel PARP inhibitors to treat BRCA-deficient breast cancers.

29753700
Spectrum and prevalence of genetic predisposition in medulloblastoma: a retrospective genetic study and prospective validation in a clinical trial cohort
Background:
        
      
      Medulloblastoma is associated with rare hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes; however, consensus medulloblastoma predisposition genes have not been defined and screening guidelines for genetic counselling and testing for paediatric patients are not available. We aimed to assess and define these genes to provide evidence for future screening guidelines.

25503501
Prevalence of mutations in a panel of breast cancer susceptibility genes in BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Clinical testing for germ-line variation in multiple cancer susceptibility genes is available using massively parallel sequencing. Limited information is available for pretest genetic counseling regarding the spectrum of mutations and variants of uncertain significance in defined patient populations.

26014290
Revisiting Li-Fraumeni Syndrome From TP53 Mutation Carriers
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of the study was to update the description of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a remarkable cancer predisposition characterized by extensive clinical heterogeneity.

23334668
The genomic landscape of hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia
The genetic basis of hypodiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), a subtype of ALL characterized by aneuploidy and poor outcome, is unknown. Genomic profiling of 124 hypodiploid ALL cases, including whole-genome and exome sequencing of 40 cases, identified two subtypes that differ in the severity of aneuploidy, transcriptional profiles and submicroscopic genetic alterations. Near-haploid ALL with 24-31 chromosomes harbor alterations targeting receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and Ras signaling (71%) and the lymphoid transcription factor gene IKZF3 (encoding AIOLOS; 13%). In contrast, low-hypodiploid ALL with 32-39 chromosomes are characterized by alterations in TP53 (91.2%) that are commonly present in nontumor cells, IKZF2 (encoding HELIOS; 53%) and RB1 (41%). Both near-haploid and low-hypodiploid leukemic cells show activation of Ras-signaling and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-signaling pathways and are sensitive to PI3K inhibitors, indicating that these drugs should be explored as a new therapeutic strategy for this aggressive form of leukemia.

11332399
Sensitivity and predictive value of criteria for p53 germline mutation screening


19468865
TP53 germline mutations in Portugal and genetic modifiers of age at cancer onset
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant disease caused by TP53 germline mutations. This study aimed to characterize the TP53 mutational spectrum in patients suspected to have LFS in Portugal and to evaluate the influence of the MDM2-SNP309 and TP53-72Arg variants and of telomere length on age of tumor onset. Probands were primarily selected using the classical LFS criteria (two cases) or the more sensitive Chompret Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) criteria (13 cases), but 12 additional patients that did not comply with those LFS or LFL criteria were included in the analysis based on clinical suspicion (LFS suspects). Nine of the 27 probands (33.3%) presented germline TP53 mutations, two of them occurring de novo and two of them being novel. Three of the nine TP53 mutations were found in families that did not comply with any of the commonly used criteria for TP53 testing, leaving room to recommend the use of less stringent criteria. An association was found between the presence of the TP53-72Arg (but not the MDM2-SNP309) variant and earlier age of onset in TP53 carriers. A negative correlation between telomere length and age of cancer onset was found in patients with germline TP53 mutation, whereas no such correlation was found in controls or in patients with wild-type TP53.

23484829
Increased oxidative metabolism in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome
There is growing evidence that alterations in metabolism may contribute to tumorigenesis. Here, we report on members of families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome who carry germline mutations in TP53, the gene encoding the tumor-suppressor protein p53. As compared with family members who are not carriers and with healthy volunteers, family members with these mutations have increased oxidative phosphorylation of skeletal muscle. Basic experimental studies of tissue samples from patients with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome and a mouse model of the syndrome support this in vivo finding of increased mitochondrial function. These results suggest that p53 regulates bioenergetic homeostasis in humans. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the National Institutes of Health; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00406445.).

19127094
A novel TP53 germline mutation in a family with a history of multiple malignancies: case report and review of the literature
Objective:
        
      
      Choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) has been associated with TP53 germline mutations and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). We describe our finding of a novel germline mutation in the TP53 gene in a family with multiple malignancies and in association with a child presenting with CPC.

29263802
Inherited breast cancer predisposition in Asians: multigene panel testing outcomes from Singapore
Genetic testing for germline mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes can potentially identify individuals at a high risk of developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. There is a paucity of such mutational information for Asians. Panel testing of 25 cancer susceptibility genes and BRCA1/2 deletion/duplication analysis was performed for 220 Asian breast cancer patients or their family members referred for genetics risk assessment. All 220 participants had at least one high-risk feature: having a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer in first- and/or second-degree relatives; having breast and ovarian cancer in the same individual or bilateral breast cancer; having early-onset breast cancer or ovarian cancer (⩽40 years of age). We identified 67 pathogenic variants in 66 (30.0%) patients. Of these, 19 (28.3%) occurred in BRCA1, 16 (23.9%) in BRCA2, 7 (10.4%) in PALB2, 6 (9.0%) in TP53, 2 (3.0%) in PTEN, 2 (3.0%) in CDH1 and 15 (22.4%) in other predisposition genes. Notably, 47.8% of pathogenic variants were in non-BRCA1/2 genes. Of the 66 patients with pathogenic mutations, 63.6% (42/66) were under the age of 40 years. Family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer is enriched in patients with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants but less predictive for non-BRCA1/2 related pathogenic variations. We detected a median of three variants of unknown significance (VUS) per gene (range 0-21). Custom gene panel testing is feasible and useful for the detection of pathogenic mutations and should be done in the setting of a formal clinical cancer genetics service given the rate of VUS.

18989156
Germline p53 mutation in a Micronesian child with adrenocortical carcinoma and subsequent osteosarcoma
In 1990, an 18-month-old Micronesian girl was initially diagnosed with a right adrenocortical carcinoma. More than a decade later (2003), she was diagnosed with metastatic osteosarcoma with the primary in her right proximal fibula. Given this child's remarkable history of malignancy, she underwent testing for a genetic mutation that is associated with increased cancer formation. One such cancer syndrome is called Li-Fraumeni syndrome where approximately 70% of patients carry a genetic mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Patients with LFS are at risk for developing cancers of the breast, soft tissues, brain, bone, adrenal gland, and blood cells. Mutational analysis of our patient did reveal the presence of a germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. She was found to have a base pair change (A-->C) at nucleotide 394 resulting in a lysine to glutamine amino acid change at codon 132 (K132Q), which remarkably has never been described in association with either adrenocortical carcinoma or osteosarcoma.

9157982
DNA damage-associated dysregulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis control in cells with germ-line p53 mutation
Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) with heterozygous p53 mutations at residues 286A, 133R, 282W, 132E, and 213ter were established from five independent Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. When cell cycle regulation in response to gamma-irradiation was studied, these LCLs showed an abnormal G1 checkpoint associated with defective inhibition of cyclin E/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity in all cases except for 282W LCL, which showed a normal G1 checkpoint. On the other hand, the control of S-phase-G2 as determined by cyclin A/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity was defective in all these LCLs. The mitotic checkpoint was also defective in the two LCLs analyzed as either competent or incompetent for G1 arrest. When radiation-induced apoptosis, which requires wild-type p53 function under optimal conditions, was studied, all of these LCLs showed significant failure compared to normal LCLs. These findings indicate that although p53-dependent transactivation and G1-S-phase cell cycle control are variably dysregulated, the induction of apoptosis and control of the cell cycle at S-phase-G2 and the mitotic checkpoint in response to DNA-damaging agents are consistently dysregulated in heterozygous mutant LCLs. This suggests that these dysfunctions underlie, at least in part, the susceptibility of Li-Fraumeni syndrome families to cancer. Furthermore, the approach presented is a potentially useful method for studying individual carriers of different germ-line p53 mutations and different biological features.

9020384
Germline p53 mutation at codon 133 in a cancer-prone family
We identified four families in which we suspected the presence of genetic factors predisposing them to cancer. We examined one family with features suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome for the presence of a germline p53 mutation in 13 of its members. To detect germline p53 mutations we performed polymerase chain reaction/nonradioisotopic single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing analysis on exons 4-9 of the p53 gene. Mutated polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was also performed on exon 5 to confirm the mutation identified by the sequencing analysis. A novel germline p53 mutation was identified at codon 133 (ATG-->AGG) in exon 5, resulting in the substitution of arginine for methionine, in all four cancer-affected individuals and in three apparently healthy individuals. We also analyzed tumor specimens for additional p53 mutations in the wild-type alleles using the same methods. However, heterozygosity was retained, and no other additional mutations in the wild-type allele were identified in any of the tumor tissues. It is possible that additional mutations in the wild-type allele are not always necessary for the loss of tumor suppressor functions. This study presents serious clinical and ethical problems about the predictive value of identifying germline p53 mutations in presymptomatic carriers. However, accurate predictive testing will be very useful in identifying unaffected individuals who are at increased risk of developing cancer and in detecting cancer at an early stage.

19367569
Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome mutations in p53 are associated with exonic methylation and splicing regulatory elements
Mutations in codon 133 of p53, which cause the loss of the Delta 133 isoform(s) expression, are very frequent in the Li-Fraumeni (LF) and Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. In sporadic cancers, silent p53 mutations are correlated with exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and exonic methylated sites. The present study shows that mutations in splice sites are also very frequent in LF/LFL syndromes, while missense mutations are less common compared to other familial or sporadic cancers (P = 0 in both cases). Furthermore, it is shown that the codons at which LF/LFL germline missense mutations occur, correlate with CpG-containing ESEs (r = 0.181, P = 0.014) which are all methylated in p53. While both silent and LF/LFL missense mutations correlate with SC35 motifs, only the latter are associated with SRp55. On the contrary, only silent mutations in sporadic cancers correlate with SF2/ASF motifs in p53. Moreover, 12.1% of LF/LFL missense mutations involve the formation of potential splice sites of considerable splicing scores. Finally, mutations that are not at, or adjacent to CpGs (+/-1 codon, 34% of all LF/LFL mutated sites), introduce considerable changes of the ESE scores (>1.3 score change). The above data verify that LF/LFL missense mutations probably result also in splicing deregulation, in addition to any changes of the protein function and are mostly associated with alterations of the exonic methylation landscape. Some of the ESEs affected in LF/LFL syndromes are also genetically unstable in sporadic cancers but non-CpG cytosine instability, which is predominantly associated with specific ESEs, is only common in sporadic cancers.

1933902
A germ line mutation in exon 5 of the p53 gene in an extended cancer family
Germ line p53 point mutations have been reported for some families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a syndrome characterized by a dominantly inherited increased susceptibility for the development of early age of onset neoplasms of diverse origin in multiple family members. All of the initially reported p53 germ line mutations have been found exclusively within a single conserved, nonpolymorphic region of the gene between condons 245 and 258. The restricted distribution of these inherited mutations has led to speculation that germ line p53 mutations have unique properties [B. Vogelstein, Nature (Lond.), 348: 681-682, 1990]. We report here on the identification of a p53 germ line mutation at codon 133 (ATG----ACG) in nine members of an extended Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. This mutation leads to an amino acid substitution in the protein and is shown to completely cosegregate with Li-Fraumeni syndrome associated cancer in this family. Its location extends the region of the p53 gene where inherited mutations predisposing to cancer are observed and suggests that their distribution may be diverse.

10477429
TP53 mutation and haplotype analysis of two large African American families
Two large apparently unrelated African American families with a high incidence of breast cancer and other tumors characteristic of Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome were studied. Mutation screening revealed that in both families the affected members carried a germline mutation of the TP53 gene at codon 133 (ATG--> ACG, M133T). In order to determine whether an ancestral haplotype was shared by these two families, polymorphic markers within and flanking the TP53 gene were studied. Haplotype analysis using five markers revealed an identical haplotype shared by the two families. Loss of heterozygosity at the TP53 locus in the probands' tumor tissues from each family was observed; in each case, the retained allele carried the common haplotype. The frequency of this haplotype in the general African American population is <0.003. This unique haplotype, combined with the rare TP53 mutation, suggests that these African American families share a common ancestry. This finding suggests that other African Americans may be carriers of this mutation and thus may be at risk of early-onset breast cancer or other cancers characteristic of the Li-Fraumeni breast sarcoma cancer family syndrome. The finding of recurring mutations in African Americans may facilitate carrier screening and identification in this population.

18685109
Excessive genomic DNA copy number variation in the Li-Fraumeni cancer predisposition syndrome
DNA copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant and ubiquitous source of inherited human genetic variation. However, the importance of CNVs to cancer susceptibility and tumor progression has not yet been explored. Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized by a strikingly increased risk of early-onset breast cancer, sarcomas, brain tumors and other neoplasms in individuals harboring germline TP53 mutations. Known genetic determinants of LFS do not fully explain the variable clinical phenotype in affected family members. As part of a wider study of CNVs and cancer, we conducted a genome-wide profile of germline CNVs in LFS families. Here, by examining DNA from a large healthy population and an LFS cohort using high-density oligonucleotide arrays, we show that the number of CNVs per genome is well conserved in the healthy population, but strikingly enriched in these cancer-prone individuals. We found a highly significant increase in CNVs among carriers of germline TP53 mutations with a familial cancer history. Furthermore, we identified a remarkable number of genomic regions in which known cancer-related genes coincide with CNVs, in both LFS families and healthy individuals. Germline CNVs may provide a foundation that enables the more dramatic chromosomal changes characteristic of TP53-related tumors to be established. Our results suggest that screening families predisposed to cancer for CNVs may identify individuals with an abnormally high number of these events.

31050713
Germline-focussed analysis of tumour-only sequencing: recommendations from the ESMO Precision Medicine Working Group
It is increasingly common in oncology practice to perform tumour sequencing using large cancer panels. For pathogenic sequence variants in cancer susceptibility genes identified on tumour-only sequencing, it is often unclear whether they are of somatic or constitutional (germline) origin. There is wide-spread disparity regarding both the extent to which systematic 'germline-focussed analysis' is carried out upon tumour sequencing data and for which variants follow-up analysis of a germline sample is carried out. Here we present analyses of paired sequencing data from 17 152 cancer samples, in which 1494 pathogenic sequence variants were identified across 65 cancer susceptibility genes. From these analyses, the European Society of Medical Oncology Precision Medicine Working Group Germline Subgroup has generated (i) recommendations regarding germline-focussed analyses of tumour-only sequencing data, (ii) indications for germline follow-up testing and (iii) guidance on patient information-giving and consent.

16941491
Unique substitution of CHEK2 and TP53 mutations implicated in primary prostate tumors and cancer cell lines
Genetic defects in CHEK2 and TP53 have been implicated in prostate cancer development. However, the interaction of these two genes in prostate cancer tumorigenesis has not been investigated. We previously described 11 CHEK2 mutations in a group of 84 primary prostate tumors. In this report, we screened the same group of tumors for TP53 mutations and revealed nine somatic and two germline mutations. One germline TP53 mutation (c.408A > T/p.Gln136His) and two somatic mutations (c.1022T > G/p.Phe341Cys and c.108-109ins22/p.His37fsX13) are novel to human cancer. More interestingly, CHEK2 and TP53 mutations were observed to be mutually substituted in these tumors. Analysis of five commonly used prostate cancer cell lines revealed that four cell lines harboring TP53 mutations carry no CHEK2 mutation while the only cell line (LNCaP) carrying wild-type TP53 harbors a CHEK2 mutation. The novel CHEK2 mutation (c.1160C>T/p.Thr387Asn) identified in LNCaP cells changes amino acid Thr387 to Asn which has been shown to impair CHEK2 autophosphorylation and activation. Our data suggest that the CHEK2 and TP53 mutations can substitute each other in at least 25% (21/84) of prostate cancers and that DNA damage-signaling pathway plays an important role in prostate cancer tumorigenesis.

9242456
Germ-line mutations of TP53 in Li-Fraumeni families: an extended study of 39 families
We have previously reported on the analysis of TP53 coding mutations in 12 classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families plus 9 families that were Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) families (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994). Mutations were found in 6 of 12 LFS families and in 1 of 9 LFL families. We have now extended these studies to include an additional nine LFS and nine LFL families, and TP53 mutations have been detected in eight of nine LFS families and in three of nine LFL families. Six of the new mutations described here are the same as those previously identified in other Li-Fraumeni families and are missense mutations at codons 245, 248, and 273 (in two families); a nonsense mutation at codon 209; and a mutation at the splice donor site in exon 4. The other five mutations are novel germ-line mutations and include missense mutations at codons 136 and 344, a 2-bp deletion within codon 191, a splice acceptor mutation in intron 3, and a 167-bp deletion of part of exon 1 and intron 1. In addition, we have detected a codon 175 mutation in a family previously reported as TP53 negative. To summarize all of the data from the families we have studied in this and our previous report (J. M. Birch et al., Cancer Res., 54: 1298-1304, 1994), mutations have been detected in 15 of 21 LFS families (71%) and in 4 of 18 LFL families (22%). These figures are somewhat higher than those previously reported by us and others for the frequency of TP53 mutations in LFS and LFL families. This could reflect our analysis of all 11 exons of TP53, including noncoding regions, as well as the use of direct sequencing rather than other less-sensitive mutation detection methods.

9569035
Two Li-Fraumeni syndrome families with novel germline p53 mutations: loss of the wild-type p53 allele in only 50% of tumours
We describe two Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. Family A was remarkable for two early childhood cases of adrenocortical tumours, family B for a high incidence of many characteristic cancers, including a childhood case of choroid plexus tumour. Using direct sequencing, we analysed exons 5-9 of the p53 gene in constitutional DNA of individuals from both families and found two novel germline mutations in exon 5. In family A, we detected a point substitution in codon 138 (GCC to CCC), which resulted in the replacement of the alanine by a proline residue. Family B harboured a single-base pair deletion in codon 178 (CAC to -AC), resulting in a frameshift and premature chain termination. Three out of six tumours examined from both families, a renal cell carcinoma, a rhabdomyosarcoma and a breast cancer, showed loss of heterozygosity and contained only the mutant p53 allele. The remaining three neoplasms, both adrenocortical tumours and the choroid plexus tumour retained heterozygosity. Immunohistochemistry with anti-p53 antibody confirmed accumulation of p53 protein in tumours with loss of heterozygosity, while the remaining tumours were p53 negative. These results support the view that complete loss of activity of the wild-type p53 need not be the initial event in the formation of all tumours in Li-Fraumeni individuals.

8308926
Germline p53 gene mutations in subsets of glioma patients
Background:
        
      
      Heritable germline mutations of the p53 gene have been described in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, occasionally in nonfamilial malignancies such as multifocal osteosarcoma, in a small subgroup of young patients with two or more primary malignancies, and in patients with sporadic breast carcinoma. We recently reported that multifocal gliomas are frequently associated with other primary malignancies, and we hypothesized that genetic alterations may account for this phenomenon.

22507745
Comparable frequency of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 germline mutations in a multi-ethnic Asian cohort suggests TP53 screening should be offered together with BRCA1/2 screening to early-onset breast cancer patients
Introduction:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations cause an increased risk to early-onset breast cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families and the majority of carriers identified through breast cancer cohorts have LFS or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) features. However, in Asia and in many low resource settings, it is challenging to obtain accurate family history and we, therefore, sought to determine whether the presence of early-onset breast cancer is an appropriate selection criteria for germline TP53 testing.

23469205
Comprehensive analysis of BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 germline mutation and tumor characterization: a portrait of early-onset breast cancer in Brazil
Germline mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes have been identified as one of the most important disease-causing issues in young breast cancer patients worldwide. The specific defective biological processes that trigger germline mutation-associated and -negative tumors remain unclear. To delineate an initial portrait of Brazilian early-onset breast cancer, we performed an investigation combining both germline and tumor analysis. Germline screening of the BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2 (c.1100delC) and TP53 genes was performed in 54 unrelated patients <35 y; their tumors were investigated with respect to transcriptional and genomic profiles as well as hormonal receptors and HER2 expression/amplification. Germline mutations were detected in 12 out of 54 patients (22%) [7 in BRCA1 (13%), 4 in BRCA2 (7%) and one in TP53 (2%) gene]. A cancer familial history was present in 31.4% of the unrelated patients, from them 43.7% were carriers for germline mutation (37.5% in BRCA1 and in 6.2% in the BRCA2 genes). Fifty percent of the unrelated patients with hormone receptor-negative tumors carried BRCA1 mutations, percentage increasing to 83% in cases with familial history of cancer. Over-representation of DNA damage-, cellular and cell cycle-related processes was detected in the up-regulated genes of BRCA1/2-associated tumors, whereas cell and embryo development-related processes were over-represented in the up-regulated genes of BRCA1/2-negative tumors, suggesting distinct mechanisms driving the tumorigenesis. An initial portrait of the early-onset breast cancer patients in Brazil was generated pointing out that hormone receptor-negative tumors and positive familial history are two major risk factors for detection of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Additionally, the data revealed molecular factors that potentially trigger the tumor development in young patients.

31278746
Germline mutations and new copy number variants among 40 pediatric cancer patients suspected for genetic predisposition
Cancer predisposition syndromes (CPS) result from germline pathogenic variants, and they are increasingly recognized in the etiology of many pediatric cancers. Herein, we report the genetic/genomic analysis of 40 pediatric patients enrolled from 2016 to 2018. Our diagnostic workflow was successful in 50% of screened cases. Overall, the proportion of CPS in our case series is 10.9% (20/184) of enrolled patients. Interestingly, 12.5% of patients achieved a conclusive diagnosis through the analysis of chromosomal imbalance. Indeed, we observed germline microdeletions/duplications of regions encompassing cancer-related genes in 50% of patients undergoing array-CGH: EIF3H duplication in a patient with infantile desmoplastic astrocytoma and low-grade Glioma; SLFN11 deletion, SOX4 duplication, and PARK2 partial deletion in three neuroblastoma patients; a PTPRD partial deletion in a child diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme. Finally, we identified two cases due to DICER1 germline mutations.

12076704
A novel, de novo germline TP53 mutation in a rare presentation of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome in the maxilla
We undertook the genetic analysis of a classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) family with clustering of primary tumours including two maxillary sarcomas, a rare LFS site of tumour occurrence. Our aim was to investigate the presence of a specific type of TP53 mutation that could be associated with this unusual predilection of site for cancer occurrence. Mutational screening of the coding region of TP53 revealed an A>T transversion in codon 144 of exon 5 (CAG>CTG, Gln>Leu) in the germline of one of the three affected members, with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumour tissue. All other affected members were negative for germline or somatic TP53 mutations. TP53 immunohistochemistry was uninformative. The mutation we report is a de novo constitutional TP53 mutation that has not been previously described in the literature. It could explain the more burdened phenotype of the affected patient (died at 21 months). Alternative mechanisms to explain the overall family phenotype are discussed.

30980208
Multigene panel testing in unselected Israeli breast cancer cases: mutational spectrum and use of BRCA1/2 mutation prediction algorithms
Background:
        
      
      Studies assessing the contribution of non-BRCA1/2 gene mutations to inherited breast cancer (BC) predisposition consistently reported low (up to 4%) yield. The current study aimed at assessing the spectrum of non-BRCA mutations in unselected Israeli BC cases and the utility of BRCAPRO and Penn II models, as tools for prediction of detecting non-BRCA1/2 mutations in Israeli BC patients who tested negative for the predominant Jewish BRCA1/2 mutations.

21305319
Joint effects of germ-line TP53 mutation, MDM2 SNP309, and gender on cancer risk in family studies of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare familial cancer syndrome characterized by early cancer onset, diverse tumor types, and multiple primary tumors. Germ-line TP53 mutations have been identified in most LFS families. A high-frequency single-nucleotide polymorphism, SNP309 (rs2279744), in MDM2 was recently confirmed to be a modifier of cancer risk in several case-series studies: substantially earlier cancer onset was observed in SNP309 G-allele carriers than in wild-type individuals by 7-16 years. However, cancer risk analyses that jointly account for measured hereditary TP53 mutations and MDM2 SNP309 have not been systematically investigated in familial cases. Here, we determined the combined effects of measured TP53 mutations, MDM2 SNP309, and gender and their interactions simultaneously in LFS families. We used the method that is designed for extended pedigrees and structured for age-specific risk models based on Cox proportional hazards regression. We analyzed the cancer incidence in 19 extended pedigrees with germ-line TP53 mutations ascertained through the clinical LFS phenotype. The dataset consisted of 463 individuals with 129 TP53 mutation carriers. Our analyses showed that the TP53 germ-line mutation and its interaction with gender were strongly associated with familial cancer incidence and that the association between MDM2 SNP309 and increased cancer risk was modest. In contrast with several case-series studies, the interaction between MDM2 SNP309 and TP53 mutation was not statistically significant in our LFS family cohort. Our results showed that SNP309 G-alleles were associated with accelerated tumor formation in both carriers and non-carriers of germ-line TP53 mutations.

20198344
Heterozygous TP53stop146/R72P fibroblasts from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome patient with impaired response to DNA damage
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome, characterized by a wide spectrum of neoplasms, occurring in children and young adults. The identification of germline TP53 mutations in LFS has given rise to a number of in vitro studies using cultures of cancer cells and non-tumoral fibroblasts presenting germline TP53 mutations. In the present study, we performed a detailed documentation of the pedigree of an LFS family with a comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations. We sequenced the TP53 gene and verified that the proband carries a germline nonsense mutation in codon 146 in one allele, the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism in the second, and other intronic polymorphisms in the TP53 gene. In order to investigate the disruption of the p53 function in a patient presenting this mutation and the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism who had so far suffered five malignant tumors and a benign meningioma, we tested her fibroblasts in response to DNA damage by evaluating the proliferation rate, apoptosis, and disruption of the TP53 pathway. The proband's heterozygous fibroblasts were not as efficient as control fibroblasts or those of her mother, who carried only the TP53Arg72Pro polymorphism, in causing cell arrest and cell death after DNA damage, which was correlated with diminished TP21 protein levels.

24382691
Anaplastic rhabdomyosarcoma in TP53 germline mutation carriers
Background:
        
      
      Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) represents a diverse category of myogenic malignancies with marked differences in molecular alterations and histology. This study examines the question if RMS predisposition due to germline TP53 mutations correlates with certain RMS histologies.

32854451
Detection of Germline Mutations in a Cohort of 139 Patients with Bilateral Breast Cancer by Multi-Gene Panel Testing: Impact of Pathogenic Variants in Other Genes beyond BRCA1/2
Patients with unilateral breast cancer (UBC) have an increased risk of developing bilateral breast cancer (BBC). The annual risk of contralateral BC is about 0.5%, but increases by up to 3% in BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant (PV) carriers. Our study was aimed to evaluate whether all BBC patients should be offered multi-gene panel testing, regardless their cancer family history and age at diagnosis. We retrospectively collected all clinical information of 139 BBC patients genetically tested for germline PVs in different cancer susceptibility genes by NGS-based multi-gene panel testing. Our investigation revealed that 52 (37.4%) out of 139 BBC patients harbored germline PVs in high- and intermediate-penetrance breast cancer (BC) susceptibility genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN, PALB2, CHEK2, ATM, RAD51C. Nineteen out of 53 positively tested patients harbored a PV in a known BC susceptibility gene (no-BRCA). Interestingly, in the absence of an analysis performed via multi-gene panel, a significant proportion (14.4%) of PVs would have been lost. Therefore, offering a NGS-based multi-gene panel testing to all BBC patients may significantly increase the detection rates of germline PVs in other cancer susceptibility genes beyond BRCA1/2, avoiding underestimation of the number of individuals affected by a hereditary tumor syndrome.

1686725
TP53 gene mutations and 17p deletions in human astrocytomas
Astrocytomas, including the most malignant form, glioblastoma multiforme, are the most frequent and deadly primary tumors of the human nervous system. Recent molecular genetic analyses of astrocytomas have demonstrated frequent chromosome 17 deletions involving the telomeric region of the short arm (17p12-pter). This region contains a candidate tumor suppressor gene, TP53, which has recently been implicated in the etiology of a broad array of human cancers. To study the possible role of TP53 in astrocytoma development, 24 randomly chosen human astrocytic tumors were examined for genomic TP53 sequence aberrations using primer-directed DNA amplification in conjunction with direct sequencing. Five of the 11 grade III astrocytomas (glioblastoma multiforme), but only one of seven grade II astrocytomas (anaplastic astrocytoma) and none of either the grade I astrocytomas or oligodendrogliomas demonstrated distinct point mutations involving the TP53 gene. These data suggest that TP53 mutations may play a role in astrocytoma development and are predominantly associated with higher grade tumors.

11479205
p53, CHK2, and CHK1 genes in Finnish families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: further evidence of CHK2 in inherited cancer predisposition
Germ-line mutations in the p53 gene predispose individuals to Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). The cell cycle checkpoint kinases CHK1 and CHK2 act upstream of p53 in DNA damage responses, and recently rare germ-line mutations in CHK2 were reported in LFS families. We have analyzed CHK1, CHK2, and p53 genes for mutations in 44 Finnish families with LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, or families phenotypically suggestive of LFS with conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis. Five different disease-causing mutations were observed in 7 families (7 of 44 families; 15.9%): 4 in the p53 gene (5 of 44 families; 11.4%) and 1 in the CHK2 gene (2 of 44 families; 4.5%). Interestingly, the other CHK2-mutation carrier also has a mutation in the MSH6 gene. The cancer phenotype in the CHK2-families was not characteristic of LFS, and may indicate variable phenotypic expression in the rare families with CHK2 mutations. No mutations in the CHK1 gene were identified. Additional work is necessary to completely unravel the molecular background of LFS.

7966399
High frequency of germline p53 mutations in childhood adrenocortical cancer
Background:
        
      
      Adrenocortical carcinoma (ADCC) is a rare childhood cancer, affecting three of 1 million children younger than 16 years old in the United States. ADCC may be found in association with the Li-Fraumeni and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes. Children with ADCC are also at substantially increased risk of second primary cancers. Because of these associations, it is believed that the genetic basis for ADCC is stronger than for most childhood malignancies. Germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with cancer predisposition in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome as well as in individuals with sporadically occurring component tumors of the syndrome.

7664239
Constitutional p53 mutations associated with brain tumors in young adults
Identification of patients at risk for developing brain tumors is important for the development of preventative strategies. Because individuals with germline p53 mutations may be at increased risk, we examined DNA from brain tumor-derived cell lines and malignant and normal nervous system tissue for p53 gene mutations using the single strand conformation polymorphism assay and direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction-amplified DNA. We found mutations in the p53 gene in eight of 22 adult glioma tissue specimens and germline mutations in two of these eight patients. In contrast, mutation of the p53 gene was not detectable in either 16 glial tumors occurring in children, glial tumor tissue from three unrelated glioblastoma multiforme patients with a familial history of cancer, or in benign meningiomas. One constitutional p53 mutation was a G to T transversion at codon 154, and the second was a C to T transition at codon 256. Both patients with germline mutations developed glioblastoma multiforme before the age of 31, although the median age for glioma patients is above 50. These findings suggest that p53 germline mutations may identify a subset of young adults predisposed to the development of high-grade astrocytic tumors.

21488255
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: TP53. Disease: Li-Fraumeni syndrome


27621308
Acute myeloid leukemia with TP53 germ line mutations


26822237
Diagnostic Yield of Clinical Tumor and Germline Whole-Exome Sequencing for Children With Solid Tumors
Importance:
        
      
      Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has the potential to reveal tumor and germline mutations of clinical relevance, but the diagnostic yield for pediatric patients with solid tumors is unknown.

23981578
Two co-existing germline mutations P53 V157D and PMS2 R20Q promote tumorigenesis in a familial cancer syndrome
Germline mutations are responsible for familial cancer syndromes which account for approximately 5-10% of all types of cancers. These mutations mainly occur at tumor suppressor genes or genome stability genes, such as DNA repair genes. Here we have identified a cancer predisposition family, in which eight members were inflicted with a wide spectrum of cancer including one diagnosed with lung cancer at 22years old. Sequencing analysis of tumor samples as well as histologically normal specimens identified two germline mutations co-existing in the familial cancer syndrome, the mutation of tumor suppressor gene P53 V157D and mismatch repair gene PMS2 R20Q. We further demonstrate that P53 V157D and/or PMS2 R20Q mutant promotes lung cancer cell proliferation. These two mutants are capable of promoting colony formation in soft agar as well as tumor formation in transgenic drosophila system. Collectively, these data have uncovered the important role of co-existing germline P53 and PMS2 mutations in the familial cancer syndrome development.

29785153
Prevalence of deleterious mutations among patients with breast cancer referred for multigene panel testing in a Romanian population
Aim:
        
      
      Multigene panel testing for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) using next generation sequencing is becoming more common in medical care.We report our experience regarding deleterious mutations of high and moderate-risk breast cancer genes (BRCA1/2, TP53, STK11, CDH1, PTEN, PALB2, CHEK2, ATM), as well as more recently identified cancer genes, many of which have increased risk but less well-defined penetrance.

22170717
TP53 germline mutations in adult patients with adrenocortical carcinoma
Context:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome associated with germline mutations in TP53. According to the Chompret criteria for LFS, any patient with adrenocortical cancer (ACC), irrespective of age and family history, is at high risk for a TP53 germline mutation. However, whereas such mutations have been detected with high frequency in childhood ACC, a large cohort of adult patients with ACC has never been investigated for TP53 germline mutations.

31159747
Analysis of hereditary cancer syndromes by using a panel of genes: novel and multiple pathogenic mutations
Background:
        
      
      Hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes are responsible for approximately 5-10% of all diagnosed cancer cases. In the past, single-gene analysis of specific high risk genes was used for the determination of the genetic cause of cancer heritability in certain families. The application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has facilitated multigene panel analysis and is widely used in clinical practice, for the identification of individuals with cancer predisposing gene variants. The purpose of this study was to investigate the extent and nature of variants in genes implicated in hereditary cancer predisposition in individuals referred for testing in our laboratory.

10207667
Molecular assessment of clonality leads to the identification of a new germ line TP53 mutation associated with malignant cystosarcoma phyllodes and soft tissue sarcoma
Cystosarcoma phyllodes (CSP) is a rare breast neoplasm composed of stromal and epithelial elements. It usually runs a benign course but it may metastasize. In a 31-year-old patient with recurring CSP, a mesenchymal tumor in the leg developed. The question arose whether the latter tumor could be a metastasis from the CSP, which would have major treatment consequences. The problem was addressed using molecular methods, i.e., comparison of the pattern of polymorphic repeat markers on chromosome 17p as well as single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing of exons 5 to 8 of the TP53 gene in both tumor and normal tissue. An identical pattern of loss of heterozygosity in both breast tumors was demonstrated, but a different pattern was shown in the tumor in the leg. This led to the conclusion that the latter tumor had to be a new primary tumor. A mutation in codon 162 of the TP53 gene was found in the tumor tissue as well as in the normal tissue of this patient. This germ line mutation leads to the replacement of isoleucine by asparagine and most likely has functional consequences. In all four examined tumors of this patient, the normal TP53 allele was lost. This is strong evidence that this germ line TP53 mutation causes the genesis of these two rare primary mesenchymal tumors in this young patient. The current study exemplifies the power of molecular diagnostic methods in investigating the specific clinical problem of clonal relation between two separate tumors. The germ line mutation found in codon 162 of the TP53 gene and the association with cystosarcoma phyllodes have not been described previously.

25374282
Simultaneous Adrenocortical Carcinoma and Neuroblastoma in an Infant With a Novel Germline p53 Mutation
We present an infant with 2 simultaneous, but histologically distinct tumors with a novel germline p53 mutation. The child was found to have a paraspinal neuroblastoma, a concurrent adrenal cortical carcinoma, and an I162F p53 gene mutation. We review the associations of germline p53 mutations (or Li-Fraumeni syndrome) with both tumor types and the current research in similar germline p53 mutations. Finally, we discuss the multiple ways in which our patient is unique including the paucity of cases with simultaneous but histologically unrelated tumors and the fact that our patient is the first reported case of an I162F germline p53 mutation.

8164043
Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma
Purpose:
        
      
      We investigated the possibility that a significant proportion of children with osteosarcoma harbor germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and, therefore, this subgroup of pediatric cancer patients should be considered for large-scale predictive testing.

26911350
Detection of high frequency of mutations in a breast and/or ovarian cancer cohort: implications of embracing a multi-gene panel in molecular diagnosis in India
Breast and/or ovarian cancer (BOC) are among the most frequently diagnosed forms of hereditary cancers and leading cause of death in India. This emphasizes on the need for a cost-effective method for early detection of these cancers. We sequenced 141 unrelated patients and families with BOC using the TruSight Cancer panel, which includes 13 genes strongly associated with risk of inherited BOC. Multi-gene sequencing was done on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Genetic variations were identified using the Strand NGS software and interpreted using the StrandOmics platform. We were able to detect pathogenic mutations in 51 (36.2%) cases, out of which 19 were novel mutations. When we considered familial breast cancer cases only, the detection rate increased to 52%. When cases were stratified based on age of diagnosis into three categories, ⩽40 years, 40-50 years and >50 years, the detection rates were higher in the first two categories (44.4% and 53.4%, respectively) as compared with the third category, in which it was 26.9%. Our study suggests that next-generation sequencing-based multi-gene panels increase the sensitivity of mutation detection and help in identifying patients with a high risk of developing cancer as compared with sequential tests of individual genes.

30076369
Identification and characterization of TP53 gene Allele Dropout in Li-Fraumeni syndrome and Oral cancer cohorts
Allele Drop out (ADO) arising from non-amplification of one allele may produce false negative result and impact clinical management. In cancer, germline and somatic genetic analysis is being increasingly used but the prevalence, nature and implications of ADO has not been studied in any cohort. In a cohort of 290 Li Fraumeni/Li Fraumeni Like Syndrome cases undergoing TP53 genetic testing, of the 69 pathogenic mutations identified so far, 5 were initially missed and 4 were misgenotyped as homozygous mutation due to germline ADO. Of the 9 germline ADOs, 8 were sequence dependent, arising from a polymorphism (rs12951053) in the primer annealing region of exon 7. Of 35 somatic TP53 variants identified by exome sequencing in 50 oral cancer tissues registered under International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), as a result of ADO, 4 were not detectable and 6 were not called as variant on Sanger Sequencing due to low peak height. High prevalence of germline and somatic ADO in the most frequently mutated cancer gene TP53, highlights the need for systematic evaluation of ADO prevalence and causes in clinically important cancer genes. False negative result for high penetrance germline mutations or actionable somatic mutations in oncogenes could have major clinical implications.

33138793
Mutation screening of germline TP53 mutations in high-risk Chinese breast cancer patients
Background:
        
      
      Germline TP53 mutations are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a severe and rare hereditary cancer syndrome. Despite the rarity of germline TP53 mutations, the clinical implication for mutation carriers and their families is significant. The risk management of TP53 germline mutation carriers is more stringent than BRCA carriers, and radiotherapy should be avoided when possible.

15951970
The TP53 mutational spectrum and frequency of CHEK2*1100delC in Li-Fraumeni-like kindreds
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a wide spectrum of neoplasms occurring at young age. Germline mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene have been identified in approximately 71 of LFS patients and 22 of Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) patients. Mutations within the cell cycle checkpoint gene CHEK2 have also been reported in some patients with LFS, LFL, and phenotypically suggestive of LFS (PS-LFS) not carrying a TP53 mutation. In this study, we show that 7 of the 23 patients with LFS/LFL tested positive for deleterious mutations in p53. Fifteen of the remaining sixteen were not found to carry the CHEK2* 1100delCmutation. These results indicate that CHEK2*1100delC is not a common cause of LFS, LFL, or PS-LFS in North American kindreds not carrying a TP53 mutation. Of note, two patients were found to carry p53* R72P, which is of unknown clinical significance. Lack of segregation of this allele in one of these kindreds provides strong evidence that the R72P allele is not disease-causing. While mutations in p53 account for a proportion of patients with LFS/LFL, future studies are needed to determine if other genes are responsible for LFS/LFL families not carrying germline p53 mutations.

29770616
Prevalence of germline BRCA mutations among women with carcinoma of the peritoneum or fallopian tube
Objective:
        
      
      The aim of the present study was to assess the frequency of germline mutations in patients with peritoneal carcinoma (PC) or the fallopian tube carcinoma (FTC), using a multi-gene panel.

16494995
The TP53 mutation, R337H, is associated with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes in Brazilian families
A TP53 germline mutation, R337H, has been previously described in children from southern Brazil with adrenocortical tumours but no documented familial history of other cancers. Here, we have screened for TP53 mutation 45 Brazilian unrelated individuals with family histories fulfilling the clinical definitions of Li-Fraumeni (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndromes. Mutations were found in 13 patients (28.9%), including six (46.1%) R337H mutations, and four novel germline mutations (V173M, V197M, G244D and IVS6+1G>T). Families with the R337H mutation presented a wide spectrum of tumours, including breast cancers (30.4%), brain cancers (10.7%), soft tissue sarcomas (10.7%) and adrenocortical carcinomas (8.9%). Testing of 53 Brazilian subjects with no cancer history showed that R337H was not a common polymorphism in that population. Moreover, loss of heterozygocity with retention of the R337H allele was observed in a breast adenocarcinoma, supporting a role for this mutation in breast tumorigenesis. These results show that the TP53 R337H germline mutation predisposes to a larger spectrum of tumours, similar to the one reported for other TP53 mutations.

11370630
Detection of 11 germline inactivating TP53 mutations and absence of TP63 and HCHK2 mutations in 17 French families with Li-Fraumeni or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome


15607981
Gain of function of a p53 hot spot mutation in a mouse model of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome carry inherited mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene and are predisposed to tumor development. To examine the mechanistic nature of these p53 missense mutations, we generated mice harboring a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 515 of p53 (p53+/515A) corresponding to the p53R175H hot spot mutation in human cancers. Although p53+/515A mice display a similar tumor spectrum and survival curve as p53+/- mice, tumors from p53+/515A mice metastasized with high frequency. Correspondingly, the embryonic fibroblasts from the p53515A/515A mutant mice displayed enhanced cell proliferation, DNA synthesis, and transformation potential. The disruption of p63 and p73 in p53-/- cells increased transformation capacity and reinitiated DNA synthesis to levels observed in p53515A/515A cells. Additionally, p63 and p73 were functionally inactivated in p53515A cells. These results provide in vivo validation for the gain-of-function properties of certain p53 missense mutations and suggest a mechanistic basis for these phenotypes.

15607980
Mutant p53 gain of function in two mouse models of Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The p53 tumor suppressor gene is commonly altered in human tumors, predominantly through missense mutations that result in accumulation of mutant p53 protein. These mutations may confer dominant-negative or gain-of-function properties to p53. To ascertain the physiological effects of p53 point mutation, the structural mutant p53R172H and the contact mutant p53R270H (codons 175 and 273 in humans) were engineered into the endogenous p53 locus in mice. p53R270H/+ and p53R172H/+ mice are models of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome; they developed allele-specific tumor spectra distinct from p53+/- mice. In addition, p53R270H/- and p53R172H/- mice developed novel tumors compared to p53-/- mice, including a variety of carcinomas and more frequent endothelial tumors. Dominant effects that varied by allele and function were observed in primary cells derived from p53R270H/+ and p53R172H/+ mice. These results demonstrate that point mutant p53 alleles expressed under physiological control have enhanced oncogenic potential beyond the simple loss of p53 function.

16707427
Identification of a novel germ line variant hotspot mutant p53-R175L in pediatric adrenal cortical carcinoma
Hotspot mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene result in the disruption of DNA contact points or alter the overall structure of the protein to prevent DNA binding. When inherited, hotspot mutants are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer predisposition. One of the most common hotspot mutations occurs at codon 175, resulting in an arginine to histidine substitution. We have identified a novel germ line variant of the 175 mutant (Arg to Leu; R175L) in a pediatric patient who developed adrenal cortical carcinoma. Surprisingly, the family is not tumor prone or associated with LFS. In vitro, the R175L mutant displayed an attenuated tumor suppressor activity in the regulation of transcription, colony formation, and apoptosis when compared with wild-type p53 and the R175H mutant. These findings suggest that p53-R175L retains sufficient activity to suppress LFS, but not adrenal cortical carcinoma. Therefore, not all hotspot mutants are functionally equivalent and the biochemical nature of the mutant may significantly influence clinical outcome. The implications of these results for genetic counseling are discussed.

26659639
Multilocus Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome: A Case Series and Review
Mendelian causes of inherited cancer susceptibility are mostly rare and characterized by variable expression and incomplete penetrance. Phenotypic variability may result from a range of causes including locus heterogeneity, allelic heterogeneity, genetic and environmental modifier effects, or chance. Another potential cause is the presence of 2 or more inherited cancer predisposition alleles in the same individual. Although the frequency of such occurrences might be predicted to be low, such cases have probably been underascertained because standard clinical practice has been to test candidate inherited cancer genes sequentially until a pathogenic mutation is detected. However, recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies now provide the opportunity to perform simultaneous parallel testing of large numbers of inherited cancer genes. Herein we provide examples of patients who harbor pathogenic mutations in multiple inherited cancer genes and review previously published examples to illustrate the complex genotype-phenotype relationships in these cases. We suggest that clinicians should proactively consider the likelihood of this phenomenon (referred to herein as multilocus inherited neoplasia alleles syndrome [MINAS]) in patients with unusual inherited cancer syndrome phenotypes. To facilitate the clinical management of novel cases of MINAS, we have established a database to collect information on what is likely to be an increasingly recognized cohort of such individuals.

27622479
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome is characterized clinically by the appearance of tumors in multiple organs generally at an early age. This hereditary condition is caused by germinal mutations in the TP53 gene, which codifies for the tumoural suppressor gene p53. We present the case of a patient aged 31 with clinical and molecular diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome who presented two synchronous tumors: a leiomyosarcoma on the forearm and a phyllodes breast tumour. She had a family history of cancer, including a son diagnosed with a cortical adrenal carcinoma when he was three years old, who died at five from the disease. Furthermore, her maternal grandmother and great-grandmother died of stomach cancer at 56 and 60 years old, respectively, while her other great-grandmother and a great aunt presented with breast cancer at the ages of 60 and 40, respectively. After genetic counseling, complete sequencing and analysis of duplications and deletions in the TP53 gene were ordered prior to diagnosis. The molecular analysis of a DNA sample taken from peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed the germinal mutation c.527G>T (p.Cys176Phe) on exon 5 of the TP53 gene, a deleterious mutation described previously in tumoural tissues. To our knowledge, this is the first published case in Colombia of Li-Fraumeni syndrome with confirmed molecular diagnosis. The diagnosis and management of Li-Fraumeni syndrome should be performed by a multidisciplinary team, and genetic counselling should be offered to patients and their relatives.

27153395
Evaluation of ACMG-Guideline-Based Variant Classification of Cancer Susceptibility and Non-Cancer-Associated Genes in Families Affected by Breast Cancer
Sequencing tests assaying panels of genes or whole exomes are widely available for cancer risk evaluation. However, methods for classification of variants resulting from this testing are not well studied. We evaluated the ability of a variant-classification methodology based on American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines to define the rate of mutations and variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in 180 medically relevant genes, including all ACMG-designated reportable cancer and non-cancer-associated genes, in individuals who met guidelines for hereditary cancer risk evaluation. We performed whole-exome sequencing in 404 individuals in 253 families and classified 1,640 variants. Potentially clinically actionable (likely pathogenic [LP] or pathogenic [P]) versus nonactionable (VUS, likely benign, or benign) calls were 95% concordant with locus-specific databases and Clinvar. LP or P mutations were identified in 12 of 25 breast cancer susceptibility genes in 26 families without identified BRCA1/2 mutations (11%). Evaluation of 84 additional genes associated with autosomal-dominant cancer susceptibility identified LP or P mutations in only two additional families (0.8%). However, individuals from 10 of 253 families (3.9%) had incidental LP or P mutations in 32 non-cancer-associated genes, and 9% of individuals were monoallelic carriers of a rare LP or P mutation in 39 genes associated with autosomal-recessive cancer susceptibility. Furthermore, 95% of individuals had at least one VUS. In summary, these data support the clinical utility of ACMG variant-classification guidelines. Additionally, evaluation of extended panels of cancer-associated genes in breast/ovarian cancer families leads to only an incremental clinical benefit but substantially increases the complexity of the results.

29324801
Clinical characteristics and registry-validated extended pedigrees of germline TP53 mutation carriers in Denmark
Introduction:
        
      
      TP53 mutation carrier (Li-Fraumeni Syndrome, LFS) cohort studies often suffer from lack of extensive pedigree exploration.

20421238
Novel germ line mutation p53-P177R in adult adrenocortical carcinoma producing neuron-specific enolase as a possible marker
Adrenocortical cancer (ACC) is a rare and aggressive endocrine tumor. The patient presented with a large retroperitoneum tumor and lung metastases. Removal of the adrenocortical tumor with part of the transverse colon and tail of the pancreas, spleen and kidney was successfully performed following chemotherapy. Levels of serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were found to be markedly high before surgery and may be clinically useful markers for monitoring tumor status during management. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the cancer cells were positive for NSE and overexpression of p53. We identified a novel germ line variant of the 177 mutant (Pro to Arg; P177R) of p53 by genomic sequencing. The genetic and biochemical data presented in this case confirm the importance of screening for p53 status in ACC with inherited cancer syndrome.

26787237
Incidental germline variants in 1000 advanced cancers on a prospective somatic genomic profiling protocol
Background:
        
      
      Next-generation sequencing in cancer research may reveal germline variants of clinical significance. We report patient preferences for return of results and the prevalence of incidental pathogenic germline variants (PGVs).

21345075
Multiple malignancies in a child with de novo TP53 mutation
The authors present the case of an 8.5-year-old boy diagnosed with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the infratemporal fossa at 21 months old. Five years later he developed an osteosarcoma of the tibia, for which he was treated with standard chemotherapy and resection. Soon after completing this treatment, ptosis of the right eye developed. A mass in the cavernous sinus was found, interpreted as an osteogenic metastatsis, although a third primary tumor could not be ruled out. Molecular genetic investigation revealed a de novo germline TP53 mutation, and heralded an aggressive clinical progression of multiple malignancies in a child.

26094658
Detection of novel germline mutations for breast cancer in non-BRCA1/2 families
The identification of the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 enhanced clinicians' ability to select high-risk individuals for aggressive surveillance and prevention, and led to the development of targeted therapies. However, BRCA1/2 mutations account for only 25% of familial breast cancer cases. To systematically identify rare, probably pathogenic variants in familial cases of breast cancer without BRCA1/2 mutations, we developed a list of 312 genes, and performed targeted DNA enrichment coupled to multiplex next-generation sequencing on 104 'BRCAx' patients and 101 geographically matched controls in Ireland. As expected, this strategy allowed us to identify mutations in several well-known high-susceptibility and moderate-susceptibility genes, including ATM (~ 5%), RAD50 (~ 3%), CHEK2 (~ 2%), TP53 (~ 1%), PALB2 (~ 1%), and MRE11A (~ 1%). However, we also identified novel pathogenic variants in 30 other genes, which, when taken together, potentially explain the etiology of the missing heritability in up to 35% of BRCAx patients. These included novel potential pathogenic mutations in MAP3K1, CASP8, RAD51B, ZNF217, CDKN2B-AS1, and ERBB2, including a splice site mutation, which we predict would generate a constitutively active HER2 protein. Taken together, this work extends our understanding of the genetics of familial breast cancer, and supports the need to implement hereditary multigene panel testing to more appropriately orientate clinical management.

33128190
Prevalence of germline variants in consensus moderate-to-high-risk predisposition genes to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in BRCA1/2-negative Brazilian patients
Purpose:
        
      
      This study aimed to identify and classify genetic variants in consensus moderate-to-high-risk predisposition genes associated with Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC), in BRCA1/2-negative patients from Brazil.

19556618
High frequency of de novo mutations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in the TP53 gene. The frequency of germline de novo TP53 mutations is largely unknown; few unequivocal de novo mutations have been reported.

16633321
[Germline tp53 neomutation in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and pancreatic adenocarcinoma]


12509279
A novel p53 mutant retained functional activity in lung carcinomas
The gene p53 is a critical tumor suppressor that can respond to multiple signals of cellular gatekeepers for growth and division. The mdm2 gene is one of the downstream target genes for transcriptional activation by the product of p53 tumor suppressor gene. Transactivation of mdm2 gene is represented by the presence of a functional P53 protein. To understand the biological function of mutant p53 in tumorigenesis, we constructed a number of p53 mutants by site-directed mutagenesis (H179Y, L194R, S240R, R249S, A276D, E286Q), followed by characterization of each P53 mutant's ability to transactivate mdm2, bax and p21waf. The transactivation properties of p53 mutants were compared by co-transfection with pGL-3-mdm2, pGL-3-bax and pGL-3-p21waf into the P53 null cell line H1299 derived from a non-small cell lung carcinoma. Among them mt p53 S240R and E286Q were shown to have enhanced transactivating activity of pGL3-mdm2, at about 43.2 and 28.2% of the wt p53 vector, respectively, while the remaining four had nearly the same level of activity as the negative control did. Furthermore, data indicated that mt p53 S240R had as high an ability to suppress the growth of the p53 null cell line H1299 as wild type p53. Therefore, mutant p53 alone is an insufficient indicator of poor prognosis. Instead, functional p53 may affect lung cancer prognosis.

17530187
The over-expression of p53 H179Y residue mutation causes the increase of cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression in HELF cells
Down-regulation of p53 expression has been found in a broad range of human cancers and cell proliferation disorders, indicating that p53 plays a key role in cell cycle regulation and tumor suppression. In our current study, we transfected human embryonic lung fibroblast (HELF) cells with pcDNA3-wild-type p53 (pcDNA3-wtp53) plasmid, or pcDNA3-H179Y-mutated p53 (pcDNA3-mtp53) plasmid that mimics the mutation found in some human lung tumors, and further studied the role of p53 in the regulation of cell proliferation. Over expression of wild-type p53 caused cell cycle arrest at G1 phase with reduced cell size, decreased expression of cyclin D3, cyclin E, Cdk2 and Cdk4, and increased expression of p21. In contrast, over expression of H179Y-mutant p53 promoted G1 to S phase transition with enlarged cell size and increased cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression in HELF cells. These results indicate that mutation at the p53 H179Y residue up-regulates cyclin A1 and Cdk4 expression, and promotes HELF cell proliferation.

8118819
Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families
The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.

1581912
Inherited p53 gene mutations in breast cancer
Recent evidence has implicated germ-line mutations of the p53 gene as the cause of cancer susceptibility in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, associated with the development of breast cancer and other neoplasms. Furthermore, somatic mutations of the p53 gene have been detected in a high percentage of non-familial breast cancers. We therefore sought to identify potential carriers of p53 gene mutations in a cohort of patients with early onset breast cancer. We examined 126 consecutive patients who developed breast cancer at or before the age of 40 for mutations of p53 within conserved regions of the gene. One patient with an inherited germ-line mutation of the p53 gene was identified but the functional significance of this mutation was not clear. It thus appears that only a small percentage of patients with breast cancer under the age of 40 carry germ-line mutations of the p53 gene, an observation which has implications for potential screening and risk assessment in such patients.

1591732
Screening for germ line TP53 mutations in breast cancer patients
The constant denaturant gel electrophoresis technique was used to screen for TP53 germ line mutations in 237 women with breast carcinoma (167 unselected patients, 30 patients with at least one first-degree relative with breast cancer, and 40 women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 35). A germ line mutation at codon 181 was noted in one of the unselected patients and a codon 245 mutation in one of the early-onset patients. Both had a family history of breast cancer and other malignancies suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The codon 245 mutation was also present in this patient's affected mother.

21059199
Radio-induced malignancies after breast cancer postoperative radiotherapy in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      There are no specific recommendations for the management of breast cancer patients with germ-line p53 mutations, an exceptional genetic condition, particularly regarding postoperative radiotherapy. Preclinical data suggested that p53 mutations conferred enhanced radiosensitivity in vitro and in vivo and the few clinical observations showed that Li-Fraumeni families were at a higher risk of secondary radio-induced malignancies.

24929325
Germline mutations of TP53 gene in breast cancer
Germline alterations of the TP53 gene encoding the p53 protein have been observed in the majority of families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare dominantly inherited disorder with breast cancer. Genomic DNA samples of 182 breast cancer cases and 186 controls were sequenced for TP53 mutations in the exon 5-9 and intervening introns 5, 7-9. Direct sequencing was done using Applied Biosystem 3730 DNA analyzer. In the present study, we observed nine mutations in the sequenced region, of which five were novel. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) was done for all the mutations; C14181T, T14201G, and G13203A have shown deviation from HWE. High linkage disequilibrium (LD) was observed between C14181T (rs129547788) and T14201G (rs12951053) (r (2) = 0.98.3; D' = 1.00), whereas other observed mutations do not show strong LD with any of the other mutations. None of the intronic mutations has shown significant association with the breast cancer, two exonic mutations G13203A (rs28934578) and A14572G are significantly (P = 0.04, P = 0.007) associated with breast cancer. Germline mutations observed in DNA-binding domain of the gene showed significant association with breast cancer. This study reports five novel germline mutations in the TP53 gene out of which one mutation may confer significant risk to the breast cancer. Mutations in DNA-binding domain of TP53 gene may play role in the early onset and prognosis of breast cancer. The population-based studies of germline mutations in DNA-binding domain of TP53 gene helps in identification of individuals and families who are at risk of developing cancers.

30239254
A novel p.Gly187Arg TP53 variant appears to result in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome characterized by pathogenic variants in the TP53 gene on chromosome 17. The most common cancers in Li-Fraumeni kindreds include sarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma. We report a 9-month-old male who was diagnosed with an adrenocortical tumor and later found to harbor a novel TP53 c.559 G > C germline variant, resulting in p.Gly187Arg. Family history included early-onset breast cancer in his paternal grandmother and paternal great-grandfather, as well as colon cancer at age 31 in a paternal cousin. The same TP53 variant was later confirmed in his paternal grandmother. Based on this information, his father (age 28, obligate carrier for the variant) was referred for colonoscopic screening and found to have multiple adenomatous polyps. This previously undescribed variant lies at an exon/intron boundary and is predicted to decrease splice site efficiency with resulting altered splicing or exon skipping. Our patient's family history provides limited evidence that this variant is a cause of Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

19238535
Identification and characterization of two novel germ line p53 mutations in the non-LFS/non-LFL breast cancer families in Chinese population
Germ line mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, p53, are known to cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). We sought to identify p53 germ line mutations in potential hereditary breast cancer patients without LFS/LFL phenotype, which will help us establish the genetic testing strategy for p53 in Chinese high-risk breast cancer families. We screened all coding exons and intron-exon boundaries of p53 in 240 women with early-onset breast cancer or affected relatives from four breast disease clinical centers in China by utilizing PCR-DHPLC and DNA sequencing analysis. Additionally, three cell lines (H1299, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231) were transfected with pEGFP-N1-only or pEGFP-N1 vectors expressing either wild-type or two novel identified mutant p53. And then we performed flow cytometry analysis in the transfected cells to determine the status of cell apoptosis, and real-time PCR as well as western blot analysis to ascertain the expression of p53, p21, and p27. Two novel germ line mutations (563T > C and 643_660del18) were detected in two independent families. Neither of them, however, was present in the 768 normal controls. Functional assays revealed that the ability to trigger cell apoptosis and transcriptional activation of target gene under similar expression of p53 were lower in two mutants versus wild-type p53. Deleterious mutations of p53 seemed to be responsible for approximately 1% of non-BRCA1/BRCA2 hereditary breast cancer in Chinese population, and our findings suggested that p53 should be included in genetic testing of Chinese non-LFS/non-LFL high-risk breast cancer families.

12524418
A novel case with germline p53 gene mutation having concurrent multiple primary colon tumours
During a search for causative genes in patients with concurrent multiple primary colon tumours, we found a novel case with a germline mutation of the p53 gene, from GCC (Ala) to GTC (Val) at codon 189. Of the six primary colon tumours that this patient had, one large advanced carcinoma exhibited a somatic p53 mutation and a somatic APC mutation, in addition to the germline p53 mutation. Two early carcinomas and three adenomas had somatic APC mutations but no somatic p53 mutation or loss of the p53 allele. K-ras-2 mutations were detected in an advanced carcinoma and an early carcinoma. The present results suggest that a patient with a certain type of germline p53 mutation is predisposed to concurrent multiple colon tumours. It is also suggested that in such a patient, a somatic APC mutation is involved in tumour formation and that an additional somatic p53 mutation contributes to tumour progression.

28499267
A novel germline TP53 mutation p.Pro190Arg detected in a patient with lung and bilateral breast cancers
Purpose:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare genetic disease with strong predispositions to multiple early-onset neoplasms, mostly sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors and adrenocortical carcinomas (LFS core cancers). In most LFS families the germline mutations of TP53 tumor suppressor gene were found. Lung cancer does not belong to the core cancers of LFS, however its higher incidence is observed in families with TP53 mutations. Our aim was to search for TP53 mutations in female lung cancer patients whose clinico-demographic characteristics suggested a probable genetic predisposition to the disease.

32885271
Multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in the province of Ontario
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic yield of multigene panel testing among patients referred with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC).

7887414
Germ-line p53 mutations in 15 families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Germ-line mutations of the tumor-suppressor gene p53 have been observed in some families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer syndrome in which affected relatives develop a diverse set of early-onset malignancies including breast carcinoma, sarcomas, and brain tumors. The analysis of the p53 gene in LFS families has been limited, in most studies to date, to the region between exon 5 and exon 9. In order to determine the frequency and distribution of germ-line p53 mutations in LFS, we sequenced the 10 coding exons of the p53 gene in lymphocytes and fibroblast cell lines derived from 15 families with the syndrome. Germ-line mutations were observed in eight families. Six mutations were missense mutations located between exons 5 and 8. One mutation was a nonsense mutation in exon 6, and one mutation was a splicing mutation in intron 4, generating aberrant shorter p53 RNA(s). In three families, a mutation of the p53 gene was observed in the fibroblast cell line derived from the proband. However, the mutation was not found in affected relatives in two families and in the blood from the one individual, indicating that the mutation probably occurred during cell culture in vitro. In four families, no mutation was observed. This study indicates that germ-line p53 mutations in LFS are mostly located between exons 5 and 8 and that approximately 50% of patients with LFS have no germ-line mutations in the coding region of the p53 gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

27714481
TP53 and CDKN1A mutation analysis in families with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like syndromes
Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni like syndromes (LFS/LFL) represent rare cancer-prone conditions associated mostly with sarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinomas. TP53 germline mutations are present in up to 80 % of families with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and in 20-60 % of families with Li-Fraumeni like phenotypes. The frequency of LFS/LFL families with no TP53 mutations detected suggests the involvement of other genes in the syndrome. In this study, we searched for mutations in TP53 in 39 probands from families with criteria for LFS/LFL. We also searched for mutations in the gene encoding the main mediator of p53 in cell cycle arrest, CDKN1A/p21, in all patients with no mutations in TP53. Eight probands carried germline disease-causing mutations in TP53: six missense mutations and two partial gene deletions. No mutations in CDKN1A coding region were detected. TP53 partial deletions in our cohort represented 25 % (2/8) of the mutations found, a much higher frequency than usually reported, emphasizing the need to search for TP53 rearrangements in patients with LFS/LFL phenotypes. Two benign tumors were detected in two TP53 mutation carriers: an adrenocortical adenoma and a neurofibroma, which raises a question about the possible implication of TP53 mutations on the development of such lesions.

19405127
Identification and characterization of a novel germline p53 mutation in a patient with glioblastoma and colon cancer
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene have been identified in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and patients with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). However, to date, germline p53 mutations in patients not fulfilling the criteria of LFS or LFL have been reported only very rarely. In our study, a novel germline c.584T>C (p.Ile195Thr) mutation of the p53 gene was found in a 21-year-old male with a glioblastoma and colon cancer. He had no family history of cancer within second-degree relatives, and loss of the wild-type p53 allele and overexpression of p53 protein were observed in both tumors. Functional analyses revealed transactivation and growth suppressive function activities of the Thr195-type p53 to be impaired. These results suggest germline p53 mutations to possibly be responsible for a subset of young adult patient with multiple malignant tumors, even those not meeting the clinical criteria for LFS or LFL.

27418648
Genetic features of myelodysplastic syndrome and aplastic anemia in pediatric and young adult patients
The clinical and histopathological distinctions between inherited versus acquired bone marrow failure and myelodysplastic syndromes are challenging. The identification of inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndromes is critical to inform appropriate clinical management. To investigate whether a subset of pediatric and young adults undergoing transplant for aplastic anemia or myelodysplastic syndrome have germline mutations in bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genes, we performed a targeted genetic screen of samples obtained between 1990-2012 from children and young adults with aplastic anemia or myelodysplastic syndrome transplanted at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. Mutations in inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genes were found in 5.1% (5/98) of aplastic anemia patients and 13.6% (15/110) of myelodysplastic syndrome patients. While the majority of mutations were constitutional, a RUNX1 mutation present in the peripheral blood at a 51% variant allele fraction was confirmed to be somatically acquired in one myelodysplastic syndrome patient. This highlights the importance of distinguishing germline versus somatic mutations by sequencing DNA from a second tissue or from parents. Pathological mutations were present in DKC1, MPL, and TP53 among the aplastic anemia cohort, and in FANCA, GATA2, MPL, RTEL1, RUNX1, SBDS, TERT, TINF2, and TP53 among the myelodysplastic syndrome cohort. Family history or physical examination failed to reliably predict the presence of germline mutations. This study shows that while any single specific bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome genetic disorder is rare, screening for these disorders in aggregate identifies a significant subset of patients with inherited bone marrow failure/myelodysplastic syndrome.

26022348
HBOC multi-gene panel testing: comparison of two sequencing centers
Multi-gene panels are used to identify genetic causes of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) in large patient cohorts. This study compares the diagnostic workflow in two centers and gives valuable insights into different next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategies. Moreover, we present data from 620 patients sequenced at both centers. Both sequencing centers are part of the German consortium for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (GC-HBOC). All 620 patients included in this study were selected following standard BRCA1/2 testing guidelines. A set of 10 sequenced genes was analyzed per patient. Twelve samples were exchanged and sequenced at both centers. NGS results were highly concordant in 12 exchanged samples (205/206 variants = 99.51 %). One non-pathogenic variant was missed at center B due to a sequencing gap (no technical coverage). The custom enrichment at center B was optimized during this study; for example, the average number of missing bases was reduced by a factor of four (vers. 1: 1939.41, vers. 4: 506.01 bp). There were no sequencing gaps at center A, but four CCDS exons were not included in the enrichment. Pathogenic mutations were found in 12.10 % (75/620) of all patients: 4.84 % (30/620) in BRCA1, 4.35 % in BRCA2 (27/620), 0.97 % in CHEK2 (6/620), 0.65 % in ATM (4/620), 0.48 % in CDH1 (3/620), 0.32 % in PALB2 (2/620), 0.32 % in NBN (2/620), and 0.16 % in TP53 (1/620). NGS diagnostics for HBOC-related genes is robust, cost effective, and the method of choice for genetic testing in large cohorts. Adding 8 genes to standard BRCA1- and BRCA2-testing increased the mutation detection rate by one-third.

7978053
Novel germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in a child with incidentally discovered adrenal cortical carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      We report a case of adrenal cortical carcinoma in an infant, which was incidentally discovered by renal sonography after a urinary tract infection. The previous death of a sibling after rhabdomyosarcoma in infancy prompted a search for a heritable p53 tumor suppressor gene mutation in this family.

25945745
DNA methylation patterns of candidate genes regulated by thymine DNA glycosylase in patients with TP53 germline mutations
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant, hereditary cancer predisposition disorder. In Brazil, the p.R337H TP53 founder mutation causes the variant form of LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome. The occurrence of cancer and age of disease onset are known to vary, even in patients carrying the same mutation, and several mechanisms such as genetic and epigenetic alterations may be involved in this variability. However, the extent of involvement of such events has not been clarified. It is well established that p53 regulates several pathways, including the thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) pathway, which regulates the DNA methylation of several genes. This study aimed to identify the DNA methylation pattern of genes potentially related to the TDG pathway (CDKN2A, FOXA1, HOXD8, OCT4, SOX2, and SOX17) in 30 patients with germline TP53 mutations, 10 patients with wild-type TP53, and 10 healthy individuals. We also evaluated TDG expression in patients with adrenocortical tumors (ADR) with and without the p.R337H TP53 mutation. Gene methylation patterns of peripheral blood DNA samples assessed by pyrosequencing revealed no significant differences between the three groups. However, increased TDG expression was observed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR in p.R337H carriers with ADR. Considering the rarity of this phenotype and the relevance of these findings, further studies using a larger sample set are necessary to confirm our results.

32029870
Germline mutations of multiple breast cancer-related genes are differentially associated with triple-negative breast cancers and prognostic factors
Genetic testing for BRCA1/2 mutations has become the standard clinical practice. Recent findings suggest the clinical significance of multigene panel testing of BRCA1/2 and other cancer-related genes. However, the clinical features of patients with breast cancer with germline mutations identified using multigene panels remain unclear. In this study, DNA samples from 583 Chinese women with breast cancer were subjected to target sequencing for 54 cancer-related genes using a pre-capture pooling method followed by next-generation sequencing. We identified 79 pathogenic germline mutations in 21 cancer-related genes. Forty-five patients (7.7%) harbored BRCA1/2 mutations, and 38 patients (6.5%) carried pathogenic mutations in the remaining 19 genes. PALB2 was the most commonly (1.2%) mutated gene other than BRCA1/2. Most of the identified pathogenic mutations were novel, suggesting mutation screening by using multigene panel testing is important particularly for non-European populations. Mutations in BRCA1/2 and the other cancer-related genes were differentially associated with clinical features. BRCA1 mutation carriers were strongly associated with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), whereas BRCA2 mutation carriers were not. Tumors in BRCA1-mutation carriers had a high histological grade. Patients with BRCA2-mutated breast cancers were likely to develop E-cadherin-negative tumors with bone metastases. Furthermore, mutations in PALB2 were strongly associated with TNBC. We demonstrated the usefulness of multigene panel testing and observed that a substantial proportion of patients with breast cancer had hereditary risk factors. Identifying differential associations between mutation status and clinical features will advance our understanding regarding the pathologies of this heterogeneous disease.

30833958
Identification of the Germline Mutation Profile in Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma by Whole Exome Sequencing
Background: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is associated with poor prognosis and occurs with high frequency in China. The germline mutation profile in ESCC remains unclear, and therefore, the discovery of oncogenic alterations in ESCC is urgently needed. This study investigates the germline mutation profile and reveals associations among genotype-environment interactions in ESCC. Methods: Whole exome sequencing and follow-up analysis were performed in 77 matched tumor-normal ESCC specimens to examine the germline profiles. Additionally, associations among genotype-environment interactions were investigated. Results: We identified 84 pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutations and 51 rare variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Twenty VUS with InterVar evidence of a score of moderate pathogenicity (PM) 2/PM2+ supporting pathogenicity (PP) 1 were found to have pathogenic significance. CYP21A2 was the most frequently mutated gene, and the p.Gln319* variant was identified in 6.5% (5/77) of patients. The TP53 p.V197E mutation, located within the DNA binding domain, was found in 1.3% (1/77) of patients. In total, the 11.7% (9/77) of individuals with homologous recombination (HR) VUS were more likely to have well-differentiated tumors than those without (P = 0.003). The degree of lymph node metastasis was correlated with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) and VUS group (P < 0.05). Moreover, the 10.4% (8/77) of individuals with mismatch repair (MMR) VUS had a higher tumor mutational burden (TMB), although the correlation was not significant. Conclusions: Our study identified the germline mutation profiles in ESCC, providing novel insights into the molecular pathogenesis of this disease. Our results may also serve as a useful resource for the exploration of the underlying mechanism of ESCC and may provide information for the prevention, diagnosis and risk management of ESCC.

32123317
Blood RNA analysis can increase clinical diagnostic rate and resolve variants of uncertain significance
Purpose:
        
      
      Diagnosis of genetic disorders is hampered by large numbers of variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) identified through next-generation sequencing. Many such variants may disrupt normal RNA splicing. We examined effects on splicing of a large cohort of clinically identified variants and compared performance of bioinformatic splicing prediction tools commonly used in diagnostic laboratories.

11263856
A double germline mutations in the APC and p53 genes
Germline mutation in the APC gene is required for the initiation of the development of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). According to Fearon and Vogelstein model, further somatic mutations in the K-ras oncogene, DCC gene and p53 tumor suppressor gene are prerequisite for development of colon carcinoma. We have found that the germline mutations in the DNA isolated from lymphocytes of an 18 years old girl with extraordinary expressive phenotype in codons 1060-1061 of the APC gene result in truncation of the APC protein. The mutation in codons 12 and 13 of the K-ras oncogene was not detected, but another germline mutation was found in codon 210 of the p53 gene. Furthermore, no one of these germline mutations was detected in the DNA of peripheral blood lymphocytes of the patient's 21 years old healthy sister. Until now, there has been no evidence about the expressive phenotype due to mutation in codons 1060-1061 of the APC gene; the role of germline missense mutation in codon 210 of the p53 gene in the FAP malignant process remains to be elucidated too. The effect of the combination of germline mutation in two different tumor suppressor genes in the progress of disease is discussed.

27957778
Assessment of TP53 Polymorphisms and MDM2 SNP309 in Premenopausal Breast Cancer Risk
Germline polymorphic variants in cancer predisposition genes such as TP53 have been shown to impact the risk of premenopausal cancer. Accordingly, the aim of this study was to assess the spectrum of polymorphisms in TP53 and its negative regulatory gene, MDM2 (SNP309:T>G) in patients with premenopausal breast cancer. Our findings in a cohort of 40 female patients demonstrate no significant correlation between the studied polymorphisms and risk of premenopausal breast cancer. Although one polymorphism is found in high frequency in this cohort (rs1800372:A>G, 9.0%), it was not associated with the risk of developing cancer before the age of 35 years in an extended cohort of 1,420 breast cancer cases. Functional studies of the rs1800372:A>G polymorphic allele reveal that it does not affect p53 transactivation function. Further study of variants or mutations in other cancer susceptibility genes is warranted to refine our understanding of the germline contribution to premenopausal breast cancer susceptibility.

30796655
Germline TP53 mutation spectrum in Sudanese premenopausal breast cancer patients: correlations with reproductive factors
Purpose:
        
      
      The role of non-genetic factors as modifiers of TP53-related hereditary breast cancer (BC) risk is debated. In this regard, little is known about the impact of germline TP53 mutations on BC in sub-Saharan Africa, where the disease often presents in non-contraceptive multiparous premenopausal women with extended history of breastfeeding. Herein, we report the germline TP53 mutations found in a series of 92 Sudanese premenopausal BC patients characterized for reproductive history.

18208484
Choroid plexus carcinoma: a new case associated with a novel TP53 germ line mutation


33332384
Nationwide germline whole genome sequencing of 198 consecutive pediatric cancer patients reveals a high incidence of cancer prone syndromes
Purpose:
        
      
      Historically, cancer predisposition syndromes (CPSs) were rarely established for children with cancer. This nationwide, population-based study investigated how frequently children with cancer had or were likely to have a CPS.

8134126
Predominantly tumor-limited expression of a mutant allele in a Japanese family carrying a germline p53 mutation
Germline mutations of p53 have been implicated as a cause of cancer susceptibility in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Since inactivation of p53 has been suggested to play an important causative role in lung cancer, the present study of the prevalence of germline mutations in 148 patients with this neoplasm was performed. None of 138 randomly chosen patients were found to carry such mutations, while a single patient had a nonsense mutation at codon 213 among 10 patients selected for early onset and/or occurrence of multiple primary cancers. In contrast to the previous report of biallelic expression of p53 in a case with a germline missense mutation, preferential expression of the wild-type allele was observed in the heterozygous state in both normal lung and peripheral blood lymphocytes of our case, whereas expression of mutant mRNA was readily detectable in her lung cancer in the absence of the remaining wild-type allele. Interestingly, the family history of the proband showed a mild aggregation of adulthood cancers and a high prevalence of stomach cancer, a rare component in American families affected by the syndrome. These observations suggest the presence of heterogeneity with regard to molecular and clinical features of germline p53 mutations.

16401470
Prevalence of early onset colorectal cancer in 397 patients with classic Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background & aims:
        
      
      Hereditary colorectal cancer is associated most commonly with the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer or familial adenomatous polyposis syndromes. We investigated the prevalence of early onset colorectal cancer and the frequency of p53 germline mutations in 64 families from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) registry.

20522432
TP53 germline mutation testing in 180 families suspected of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutation detection rate and relative frequency of cancers in different familial phenotypes
BACKGROUND Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Most families fulfilling the classical diagnostic criteria harbour TP53 germline mutations. However, TP53 germline mutations may also occur in less obvious phenotypes. As a result, different criteria are in use to decide which patients qualify for TP53 mutation analysis, including the LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) and Chompret criteria. We investigated which criteria for TP53 mutation analysis resulted in the highest mutation detection rate and sensitivity in Dutch families. We describe the tumour spectrum in TP53-positive families and calculated tumour type specific relative risks. METHOD A total of 180 Dutch families referred for TP53 mutation analysis were evaluated. Tumour phenotypes were verified by pathology reports or clinical records. RESULTS A TP53 germline mutation was identified in 24 families. When the Chompret criteria were used 22/24 mutations were detected (sensitivity 92%, mutation detection rate 21%). In LFS and LFL families 18/24 mutations were found (sensitivity 75%). The two mutations detected outside the 'Chompret group' were found in a child with rhabdomyosarcoma and a young woman with breast cancer. In the mutation carriers, in addition to the classical LFS tumour types, colon and pancreatic cancer were also found significantly more often than in the general population. CONCLUSION We suggest TP53 mutation testing for all families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. In addition, TP53 mutation testing can be considered in the event of childhood sarcoma and breast cancer before 30 years. In addition to the risk for established LFS tumour types, TP53-positive individuals may also have an elevated risk for pancreatic and colon cancer.

9290701
Screening the p53 status of human cell lines using a yeast functional assay
We have screened the p53 status of 156 human cell lines, including 142 tumor cell lines from 27 different tumor types and 14 cell lines from normal tissues by using functional analysis of separated alleles in yeast. This assay enables us to score wild-type p53 expression on the basis of the ability of expressed p53 to transactivate the reporter gene HIS3 via the p53-responsive GAL1 promotor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Of 142 tumor cell lines, at least 104 lines (73.2%) were found to express the mutated p53 gene: 94 lines (66.2%) were mutated in both alleles, three lines (2.1%) were heterozygous, and no p53 cDNA was amplified from seven lines (4.9%). Of the 14 cell lines originating from normal tissues, all the transformed or immortalized cell lines expressed mutant p53 only. Yeast cells expressing mutant p53 derived from 94 cell lines were analyzed for temperature-sensitive growth. p53 cDNA from eight cell lines showed p53-dependent temperature-sensitive growth, growing at 30 degrees C but not at 37 degrees C. Four temperature-sensitive p53 mutations were isolated: CAT-->CGT at codon 214 (H214R), TAC-->TGC at codon 234 (Y234C), GTG-->ATG at codon 272 (V272M), and GAG-->AAG (E285K). Functionally wild-type p53 was detected in 38 tumor cell lines (26.8%) and all of the diploid fibroblasts at early and late population doubling levels. These results strongly support the previous findings that p53 inactivation is one of the most frequent genetic events that occurs during carcinogenesis and immortalization.

28135145
Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations in Individuals With Colorectal Cancer
Purpose Hereditary factors play an important role in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk, yet the prevalence of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations in patients with CRC unselected for high-risk features (eg, early age at diagnosis, personal/family history of cancer or polyps, tumor microsatellite instability [MSI], mismatch repair [MMR] deficiency) is unknown. Patients and Methods We recruited 1,058 participants who received CRC care in a clinic-based setting without preselection for age at diagnosis, personal/family history, or MSI/MMR results. All participants underwent germline testing for mutations in 25 genes associated with inherited cancer risk. Each gene was categorized as high penetrance or moderate penetrance on the basis of published estimates of the lifetime cancer risks conferred by pathogenic germline mutations in that gene. Results One hundred five (9.9%; 95% CI, 8.2% to 11.9%) of 1,058 participants carried one or more pathogenic mutations, including 33 (3.1%) with Lynch syndrome (LS). Twenty-eight (96.6%) of 29 available LS CRCs demonstrated abnormal MSI/MMR results. Seventy-four (7.0%) of 1,058 participants carried non-LS gene mutations, including 23 (2.2%) with mutations in high-penetrance genes (five APC, three biallelic MUTYH, 11 BRCA1/2, two PALB2, one CDKN2A, and one TP53), 15 of whom lacked clinical histories suggestive of their underlying mutation. Thirty-eight (3.6%) participants had moderate-penetrance CRC risk gene mutations (19 monoallelic MUTYH, 17 APC*I1307K, two CHEK2). Neither proband age at CRC diagnosis, family history of CRC, nor personal history of other cancers significantly predicted the presence of pathogenic mutations in non-LS genes. Conclusion Germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations are carried by 9.9% of patients with CRC. MSI/MMR testing reliably identifies LS probands, although 7.0% of patients with CRC carry non-LS mutations, including 1.0% with BRCA1/2 mutations.

30216591
Diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome: Differentiating TP53 germline mutations from clonal hematopoiesis: Results of the observational AGO-TR1 trial
The Li-Fraumeni cancer predisposition syndrome (LFS1) presents with a variety of tumor types and the TP53 gene is covered by most diagnostic cancer gene panels. We demonstrate that deleterious TP53 variants identified in blood-derived DNA of 523 patients with ovarian cancer (AGO-TR1 trial) were not causal for the patients' ovarian cancer in three out of six TP53-positive cases. In three out of six patients, deleterious TP53 mutations were identified with low variant fractions in blood-derived DNA but not in the tumor of the patient seeking advice. The analysis of the TP53 and PPM1D genes, both intimately involved in chemotherapy-induced and/or age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH), in 523 patients and 1,053 age-matched female control individuals revealed that CH represents a frequent event following chemotherapy, affecting 26 of the 523 patients enrolled (5.0%). Considering that TP53 mutations may arise from chemotherapy-induced CH, our findings help to avoid false-positive genetic diagnoses of LFS1.

18307025
A Japanese patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who had nine primary malignancies associated with a germline mutation of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene
We describe a patient who had nine primary malignant tumors and a germline mutation in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, characteristically found in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). A 15-year-old girl with no family history of cancer was referred to our hospital because of pain and swelling of the right knee. Osteosarcoma was diagnosed. The patient received chemotherapy followed by surgery and had a remission. After the age of 28 years, nine primary malignant tumors developed successively, including right breast cancer, colon cancer, malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) of the abdominal wall, right lung double cancers, bilateral breast cancers, and MFH of the left thigh. This is the second highest number of types of primary malignant tumors to be reported in LFS. All tumors were treated by a multidisciplinary approach, including surgery. Genetic analysis revealed a germline missense mutation in the p53 gene (c.659 A > G), resulting in Y220C, which has been reported in three families with LFS. The patient died of lung metastasis from MFH at the age of 37 years. Despite the multiple tumors, repeated induction of remissions resulted in long survival. Our findings suggest that a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, including surgery, is beneficial in patients with LFS.

11668501
Comparative analysis of the NF2, TP53, PTEN, KRAS, NRAS and HRAS genes in sporadic and radiation-induced human meningiomas
Irradiation to the head is associated with a significantly increased incidence of meningiomas. Radiation-induced meningiomas morphologically resemble their sporadically arising counterparts; however, they frequently exhibit a more malignant phenotype. Several genes have been shown to carry mutations in meningiomas, with the NF2 gene being most frequently affected. To examine whether the NF2 gene also plays a role in the development of radiation-induced meningiomas, we compiled a series of meningiomas from 25 patients with a history of previous cranial radiation. This series was compared with 21 atypical WHO grade II meningiomas and 15 anaplastic WHO grade III meningiomas, all from patients without a history of prior irradiation. NF2 mutations occurred significantly more often in sporadic atypical and anaplastic than in radiation-induced meningiomas (p < 0.02). In addition, all meningiomas were examined for mutations in the PTEN, TP53, HRAS, KRAS and NRAS genes. Two mutations in the TP53 gene in a sporadic and a radiation-induced tumor were detected. PTEN mutations were observed in 1 anaplastic and 1 radiation-induced meningioma. No structural alterations were seen in the RAS genes. Our data suggest that, while there is a certain overlap in the mutational spectrum, NF2 mutations may not play such a prominent role in the pathogenesis of radiation-induced compared to sporadic meningiomas.

25637381
Actionable exomic incidental findings in 6503 participants: challenges of variant classification
Recommendations for laboratories to report incidental findings from genomic tests have stimulated interest in such results. In order to investigate the criteria and processes for assigning the pathogenicity of specific variants and to estimate the frequency of such incidental findings in patients of European and African ancestry, we classified potentially actionable pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in all 4300 European- and 2203 African-ancestry participants sequenced by the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP). We considered 112 gene-disease pairs selected by an expert panel as associated with medically actionable genetic disorders that may be undiagnosed in adults. The resulting classifications were compared to classifications from other clinical and research genetic testing laboratories, as well as with in silico pathogenicity scores. Among European-ancestry participants, 30 of 4300 (0.7%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.1%) had a disruptive variant that was expected to be pathogenic, whereas 52 (1.2%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. For African-ancestry participants, six of 2203 (0.3%) had a pathogenic SNV and six (0.3%) had an expected pathogenic disruptive variant, whereas 13 (0.6%) had likely pathogenic SNVs. Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling mammalian conservation score and the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion summary score of conservation, substitution, regulation, and other evidence were compared across pathogenicity assignments and appear to have utility in variant classification. This work provides a refined estimate of the burden of adult onset, medically actionable incidental findings expected from exome sequencing, highlights challenges in variant classification, and demonstrates the need for a better curated variant interpretation knowledge base.

7706467
Germline p53 mutations are frequently detected in young children with rhabdomyosarcoma
We investigated the possibility that a proportion of children with sporadic rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) carry constitutional mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. 33 patients with sporadic RMS at two large outpatient pediatric oncology clinics submitted blood samples. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and PCR was used to amplify exons 2-11 of the p53 gene. Amplified genomic DNA was screened for the presence of germline p53 mutations using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. The DNA sequence of those samples that showed aberrant migration of bands on SSCP analysis was determined to identify the precise nature of the gene mutations. Patient records were reviewed to assess clinical correlates of the mutant p53 carrier state. Heterozygous constitutional mutations were detected in 3/33 patient samples screened. Two of these missense mutations are located in exon 7 and one in exon 8 of the p53 gene. The presence of mutations was not correlated with tumor histology, stage, or site. However, an association between young age at diagnosis and presence of a constitutional p53 mutation was noted: 3/13 children under the age of 3 yr at diagnosis carried mutations, whereas none of 20 children over 3 yr of age at diagnosis harbored a detectable constitutional mutation. These results in children with RMS corroborates previous findings in other clinical settings suggesting that the mutant p53 carrier state may predispose individuals to malignancy at an early age. Although this study did not assess whether the mutations were preexisting or new germline alterations, assessment of close relatives of RMS patients for cancer risk and predictive genetic testing may be indicated.

28975465
Expanding the spectrum of germline variants in cancer
Our ability to identify germline variants in hereditary cancer cases remains challenged by the incomplete cataloging of relevant genes and lack of consensus on who should be tested. We designed a panel [hereditary oncogenesis predisposition evaluation (HOPE)] that encompasses most of the genes known to be associated with cancer development and tested its yield on more than 1300 samples of cancer patients. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in high and intermediate risk genes were identified in 16, 23.9, 9.7 and 2.7%, respectively, of peripheral blood or normal tissue samples taken from patients with breast, ovarian, colorectal and thyroid cancer. To confirm specificity of these findings, we tested an ethnically matched cohort of 816 individuals and only identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 1.59% (0.98% in high risk and 0.61% in intermediate risk). Remarkably, pathogenic or likely pathogenic alleles in DNA repair/genomic instability genes (other than BRCA2, ATM and PALB2) accounted for at least 16.8, 11.1, 50 and 45.5% of mutation-positive breast, ovarian, thyroid and colorectal cancer patients, respectively. Family history was noticeably lacking in a substantial fraction of mutation-positive cases (63.7, 81.5, 42.4 and 87.5% in breast, ovarian, colorectal and thyroid, respectively). Our results show high contribution of germline mutations to cancer predisposition that extends beyond "classical" hereditary cancer genes. Family history was lacking in 63.5% mutation-positive cases, shows that hereditary cancer need not appear familial and suggests that relaxed selection of cancer patients for hereditary cancer panels should be considered.

25925845
Germline TP53 mutational spectrum in French Canadians with breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Specific germline mutations in the hereditary breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility (HBC/HBOC) genes, BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, have been shown to recur in French Canadians of Quebec, Canada, and this has been attributed to common ancestors. Germline TP53 mutation carriers are known to segregate in Li-Fraumeni syndrome families, which feature young age of onset breast cancer. We have reported rare TP53 mutation carriers in French Canadian HBC families, though none recurred possibly due to the limited number of cancer families investigated. Here we describe TP53 germline mutations found in French Canadian cancer families provided from hereditary cancer clinics; investigate 37 new BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative HBC/HBOC families for the TP53 mutations; and assess the frequency of TP53 mutations in a 1235 French Canadian breast cancer cases not selected for family history of cancer.

26641009
Inherited mutations in cancer susceptibility genes are common among survivors of breast cancer who develop therapy-related leukemia
Background:
        
      
      Risk factors for the development of therapy-related leukemia (TRL), an often lethal late complication of cytotoxic therapy, remain poorly understood and may differ for survivors of different malignancies. Survivors of breast cancer (BC) now account for the majority of TRL cases, making the study of TRL risk factors in this population a priority.

22851211
Routine TP53 testing for breast cancer under age 30: ready for prime time?
It is well known that early-onset breast cancer may be due to an inherited predisposition. When evaluating women diagnosed with breast cancer under age 30, two important syndromes are typically considered: Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Many women are offered genetic testing for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes; however, few are offered genetic testing for mutations in the TP53 gene. There is a concern that overly restrictive testing of TP53 may fail to recognize families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We reviewed the genetic test results and family histories of all women with early-onset breast cancer who had genetic testing of the TP53 gene at the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children. Of the 28 women tested, six (33.3 %) had a mutation in the TP53 gene; a mutation was found in 7.7 % of women who did not meet current criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. By reviewing similar data published between 2000 and 2011, we estimate that 5-8 % of women diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer, and who have a negative family history, may have a mutation in the TP53 gene. Given the potential benefits versus harms of this testing, we discuss the option of simultaneous testing of all three genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53) for women diagnosed with breast cancer before age 30.

29875428
The impact of variant classification on the clinical management of hereditary cancer syndromes
Purpose:
        
      
      The reclassification of genetic variants poses a significant challenge for laboratories and clinicians. Variant review has resulted in the reclassification of variants of unknown significance as well as the reclassification of previously established pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants. These reclassifications have the potential to alter the clinical management of patients with hereditary cancer syndromes.

12406399
[Description of a new TP53 gene germline mutation in a family with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Genetic counselling to healthy mutation carriers]
Background:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by early-onset breast cancer, soft-tissue sarcomas and osteosarcomas, acute leukemia, adrenocortical neoplasms and central nervous system tumors. Germline mutations in gene TP53 are identified in a percentage of affected families.

32427313
Contribution of Germline Predisposition Gene Mutations to Breast Cancer Risk in African American Women
Background:
        
      
      The risks of breast cancer in African American (AA) women associated with inherited mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes are not well defined. Thus, whether multigene germline hereditary cancer testing panels are applicable to this population is unknown. We assessed associations between mutations in panel-based genes and breast cancer risk in 5054 AA women with breast cancer and 4993 unaffected AA women drawn from 10 epidemiologic studies.

31748977
Radiotherapy-induced malignancies in breast cancer patients with TP53 pathogenic germline variants (Li-Fraumeni syndrome)
The risk of radiotherapy-induced malignancies (RIMs) is a concern when treating Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Li-Fraumeni Like (LFL) patients. However, the type of TP53 pathogenic germline variant may possibly influence this risk. TP53 p.R337H mutation is particularly prevalent in Brazil. We aimed to evaluate the outcomes of patients with pathogenic TP53 variants treated for localized breast cancer in a Brazilian cohort. We evaluated retrospectively a cohort of patients with germline TP53 pathogenic variants treated for localized breast cancer between December 1999 and October 2017. All patients were followed by the Hereditary Cancer Group of an academic cancer center. Our primary objective was to evaluate the occurrence of RIMs after adjuvant radiotherapy. Sixteen patients were evaluated; 10 (62.5%) had a germline TP53 p.R337H pathogenic variant. Median age was 39.8 years. Thirteen patients had invasive ductal carcinoma: 8 (61.5%) were hormone receptor-positive; 6 (46.1%), human epithelial growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-amplified. Three patients had ductal carcinoma in situ. Most patients (N = 12/16, 75%) received adjuvant radiotherapy. After a median follow-up of 52.5 months, 2 patients (2/12, 16.6%) had RIMs. One had a fibrosarcoma and the other, a low-grade leiomyosarcoma. In the group treated with radiotherapy, one distant recurrence was diagnosed (1/12), and no loco-regional recurrence occurred. Among 4 patients who did not receive radiotherapy, 2 presented with loco-regional recurrence. In this cohort of patients with LFS enriched in TP53 p.R337H pathogenic variant, the incidence of RIMs after treatment of localized breast cancer was lower than previous literature. Nevertheless, rates of RIMs were still alarming. Early molecular diagnosis and careful evaluation of treatment risks and benefits are essential for these patients.

23259501
Number of rare germline CNVs and TP53 mutation types
Background:
        
      
      The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), an inherited rare cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a variety of early-onset tumors, is caused by different highly penetrant germline mutations in the TP53 gene; each separate mutation has dissimilar functional and phenotypic effects, which partially clarifies the reported heterogeneity between LFS families. Increases in copy number variation (CNV) have been reported in TP53 mutated individuals, and are also postulated to contribute to LFS phenotypic variability. The Brazilian p.R337H TP53 mutation has particular functional and regulatory properties that differ from most other common LFS TP53 mutations, by conferring a strikingly milder phenotype.

28279309
Allele-specific wild-type TP53 expression in the unaffected carrier parent of children with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder where an oncogenic TP53 germline mutation is passed from parent to child. Tumor protein p53 is a key tumor suppressor regulating cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage. Paradoxically, some mutant TP53 carriers remain unaffected, while their children develop cancer within the first few years of life. To address this paradox, response to UV stress was compared in dermal fibroblasts (dFb) from an affected LFS patient vs. their unaffected carrier parent. UV induction of CDKN1A/p21, a regulatory target of p53, in LFS patient dFb was significantly reduced compared to the unaffected parent. UV exposure also induced significantly greater p53[Ser15]-phosphorylation in LFS patient dFb, a reported property of some mutant p53 variants. Taken together, these results suggested that unaffected parental dFb may express an increased proportion of wild-type vs. mutant p53. Indeed, a significantly increased ratio of wild-type to mutant TP53 allele-specific expression in the unaffected parent dFb was confirmed by RT-PCR-RFLP and RNA-seq analysis. Hence, allele-specific expression of wild-type TP53 may allow an unaffected parent to mount a response to genotoxic stress more characteristic of homozygous wild-type TP53 individuals than their affected offspring, providing protection from the oncogenesis associated with LFS.

31494577
High-sensitivity microsatellite instability assessment for the detection of mismatch repair defects in normal tissue of biallelic germline mismatch repair mutation carriers
Introduction:
        
      
      Lynch syndrome (LS) and constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD) are hereditary cancer syndromes associated with mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency. Tumours show microsatellite instability (MSI), also reported at low levels in non-neoplastic tissues. Our aim was to evaluate the performance of high-sensitivity MSI (hs-MSI) assessment for the identification of LS and CMMRD in non-neoplastic tissues.

32959997
Screening of germline mutations in young Rwandan patients with breast cancers
Background:
        
      
      In Sub-Saharan Africa breast cancer is commonly detected at younger age and the profile is more aggressive with a high mortality rate compared to the European countries. It is suggested that African-specific genetic background plays a key role in this matter. The present study aimed at understanding the role of genetic factors in breast cancer development in young Rwandan.

11180592
Use of mutation spectra analysis software
The study and comparison of mutation(al) spectra is an important problem in molecular biology, because these spectra often reflect on important features of mutations and their fixation. Such features include the interaction of DNA with various mutagens, the function of repair/replication enzymes, and properties of target proteins. It is known that mutability varies significantly along nucleotide sequences, such that mutations often concentrate at certain positions, called "hotspots," in a sequence. In this paper, we discuss in detail two approaches for mutation spectra analysis: the comparison of mutation spectra with a HG-PUBL program, (FTP: sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/biology/dna-mutations/hyperg) and hotspot prediction with the CLUSTERM program (www.itba.mi.cnr.it/webmutation; ftp.bionet.nsc.ru/pub/biology/dbms/clusterm.zip). Several other approaches for mutational spectra analysis, such as the analysis of a target protein structure, hotspot context revealing, multiple spectra comparisons, as well as a number of mutation databases are briefly described. Mutation spectra in the lacI gene of E. coli and the human p53 gene are used for illustration of various difficulties of such analysis.

2259385
Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Tumour suppressor genes, whose usual function seems to be controlling normal cell proliferation, have been implicated in many inherited and sporadic forms of malignancies Much evidence supports the concept of tumour formation by loss-of-function mutations in suppressor genes, as predicted by the two-hit model of Knudson and DeMars. The suppressor gene, p53, is affected in such a manner by numerous mutations, which occur in a variety of human tumours. These mutations usually represent the loss of one allele and the substitution of a single base in the other. We have now analysed the p53 gene in a family affected by Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by the occurrence of diverse mesenchymal and epithelial neoplasms at multiple sites. In some instances the neoplasms seem to be related to exposure to carcinogens, including ionizing radiation. The Li-Fraumeni family that we studied had noncancerous skin fibroblasts (NSF) with an unusual radiation-resistant phenotype. DNA derived from the NSF cells of four family members, spanning two generations, had the same point mutation in codon 245 (GGC----GAC) of the p53 gene. This mutation leads to substitution of aspartic acid for glycine in one of the regions identified as a frequent target of point mutations in p53. The NSF cell lines with the mutation also retained the normal p53 allele. This inherited p53 mutation may predispose the members of this family to increased susceptibility to cancer.

1978757
Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms
Familial cancer syndromes have helped to define the role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of cancer. The dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is of particular interest because of the diversity of childhood and adult tumors that occur in affected individuals. The rarity and high mortality of LFS precluded formal linkage analysis. The alternative approach was to select the most plausible candidate gene. The tumor suppressor gene, p53, was studied because of previous indications that this gene is inactivated in the sporadic (nonfamilial) forms of most cancers that are associated with LFS. Germ line p53 mutations have been detected in all five LFS families analyzed. These mutations do not produce amounts of mutant p53 protein expected to exert a trans-dominant loss of function effect on wild-type p53 protein. The frequency of germ line p53 mutations can now be examined in additional families with LFS, and in other cancer patients and families with clinical features that might be attributed to the mutation.

30093976
Clinical genetic testing outcome with multi-gene panel in Asian patients with multiple primary cancers
Background:
        
      
      Developing multiple cancers is an indicator of underlying hereditary cancer predisposition, but there is a paucity of data regarding the clinical genetic testing outcomes of these patients.

8075648
Anaplastic Wilms' tumour, a subtype displaying poor prognosis, harbours p53 gene mutations
The genetics of Wilms' tumour (WT), a paediatric malignancy of the kidney, is complex. Inactivation of the tumour suppressor gene, WT1, is associated with tumour aetiology in approximately 10-15% of WTs. Chromosome 17p changes have been noted in cytogenetic studies of WTs, prompting us to screen 140 WTs for p53 mutations. When histopathology reports were available, p53 mutations were present in eight of eleven anaplastic WTs, a tumour subtype associated with poor prognosis. Amplification of MDM2, a gene whose product binds and sequesters p53, was excluded. Our results indicate that p53 alterations provide a molecular marker for anaplastic WTs.

17427234
Composite adrenal anaplastic neuroblastoma and virilizing adrenocortical tumor with germline TP53 R248W mutation
Composite tumors are extremely rare. Such tumors in adrenal glands are usually of neuroendocrine-neural type and occur mostly in adults. Their pathogenesis remains elusive. We report a patient with composite neuroblastoma (NB), adrenocortical tumor (ACT), and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) with germline TP53 R248W mutation. LFS predisposes to the development of leukemia, sarcomas, adrenocortical and breast carcinomas, brain tumors and, questionably, NB. A unique correlation between a single TP53 mutation (R337H) and ACT has been reported in southern Brazilian children. It remains unclear at this time whether a similar association of NB and R248W in patients with LFS exists.

30553995
DNA variants in Helicobacter pylori infected patients with chronic gastritis, dysplasia and gastric cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      The main scope of this study was to evaluate the importance of selected DNA variants for developing inflammation of gastric mucosa and carcinogenesis in gastrointestinal diseases in patients infected with Helicobacter pylori.

30374176
Outcomes of 92 patient-driven family studies for reclassification of variants of uncertain significance
Purpose:
        
      
      Family studies are an important but underreported source of information for reclassification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). We evaluated outcomes of a patient-driven framework that offered familial VUS reclassification analysis to any adult with any clinically ascertained VUS from any laboratory in the United States.

8134127
Two germ-line mutations affecting the same nucleotide at codon 257 of p53 gene, a rare site for mutations
Codon 257 of the p53 gene is an extremely rare target for somatic mutations (accounting for only two of 1600 published mutations). We report here two constitutional mutations both affecting the second nucleotide of codon 257. A thymine to adenine transversion resulting in an amino acid change from leucine to glutamine was found in one proband who developed multiple independent malignant tumors (osteosarcoma, phyllodes tumor, soft-tissue sarcoma). Her mother died of early-onset breast cancer. In the other case, a deletion resulting in a frameshift in the C-terminal coding region of p53 was found in a woman who was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 34. This woman belongs to a family with features of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In both cases, the p53 mutations identified in the proband was found in other members of the family. Codon 257, even if rarely mutated in somatic cells, may thus be an important target for germ-line mutations.

26534844
Targeted massively parallel sequencing of a panel of putative breast cancer susceptibility genes in a large cohort of multiple-case breast and ovarian cancer families
Introduction:
        
      
      Gene panel testing for breast cancer susceptibility has become relatively cheap and accessible. However, the breast cancer risks associated with mutations in many genes included in these panels are unknown.

26225655
Targeted Resequencing of 30 Genes Improves the Detection of Deleterious Mutations in South Indian Women with Breast and/or Ovarian Cancers
Background:
        
      
      We earlier used PCR-dHPLC for mutation analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2. In this article we report application of targeted resequencing of 30 genes involved in hereditary cancers.

9067756
Three germline mutations in the TP53 gene
Three germline mutations in the TP53 tumor-suppressor gene are reported, two of which are not reported previously. A missense mutation at codon 265 of TP53 was found in three patients of a family that complied with the definition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. A nonsense mutation in codon 306 was found in a woman who had had a rhabdomyosarcoma at age 4 and a subsequent breast cancer at age 22. She was part of a Li-Fraumeni-like family, but the parental origin of the mutation could not be traced. Finally, while screening for somatic alterations in TP53 in a series of 141 sporadic breast tumors, we detected a constitutional missense mutation in codon 235 in a woman diagnosed with breast cancer at age 26 and a recurrence 4 years later. The recurrence, but not the primary tumor, showed an additional missense mutation at codon 245 as well as loss of the wild-type allele. This suggests that the 245 mutation was particularly important for tumor progression and that there might exist heterogeneity in terms of cancer predisposition potential among the various germline TP53 mutations.

1562462
Constitutional p53 mutation in a non-Li-Fraumeni cancer family


30588330
Rare TP53 variant associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome exhibits variable penetrance in a Saudi family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an inherited, autosomal-dominant condition that predisposes individuals to a wide-spectrum of tumors at an early age. Approximately 70% of families with classic LFS have pathogenic variants in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 that disrupt protein function or stability. While more than 70% of pathogenic variants in TP53 are missense variants, the vast majority occur very infrequently, and thus their clinical significance is uncertain or conflicting. Here, we report an extremely rare TP53 missense variant, c.799C > T (p.Arg267Trp), identified in a 2-year-old Saudi proband diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) and six of his first- and second-degree relatives. CPC is frequently found in families with LFS, and this is the first detailed report of a family with this variant. Intriguingly, the proband's father is homozygous for TP53 c.799C > T and phenotypically normal at 39 years of age. While loss of TP53 heterozygosity is often observed in tumors from individuals with LFS, homozygous germline TP53 pathogenic variants are rare. Based on our analysis of this single family, we hypothesize that TP53 c.799C > T has low or variable penetrance for LFS, with predisposition to the development of CPC. The observations from this family have furthered our understanding of the phenotypic variability that may be caused by one variant of TP53, even in the same family, and suggest that other factors (genetic and/or environmental) may play a role in mechanism of disease manifestation in LFS.

1737852
Hereditary and acquired p53 gene mutations in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
The p53 gene was examined in primary lymphoblasts of 25 pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia by the RNase protection assay and by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis in 23 of 25 cases. p53 mutations were found to occur, but at a low frequency (4 of 25). While all four mutations were identified by single strand conformation polymorphism, the comparative sensitivity of RNase protection was 50% (2 of 4). Heterozygosity was retained at mutated codons in 3 of 4 cases. One pedigree was consistent with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and bone marrow from both diagnosis and remission indicated a germline G to T transversion at codon 272 (valine to leucine). Although members of another family were affected with leukemia, a 2-bp deletion in exon 6 was nonhereditary. The other two nonhereditary p53 mutations included a T to G transversion at codon 270 (phenylalanine to cysteine) and a G to C transversion at codon 248 (arginine to proline). These data support the role of both hereditary and acquired p53 mutations in the pathogenesis and/or progression of some cases of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

23175693
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective series of unselected patients with adrenocortical carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a hallmark cancer in families with Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) caused by mutations in the TP53 gene. The prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in children diagnosed with ACC ranges from 50-97%. Although existing criteria advocate for TP53 testing in all patients with ACC regardless of age at diagnosis, the overall prevalence of germline mutations in patients diagnosed with ACC has not been well studied.

15492269
Modulation of gene expression by tumor-derived p53 mutants
p53 mutants with a single amino acid substitution are overexpressed in a majority of human cancers containing a p53 mutation. Overexpression of the mutant protein suggests that there is a selection pressure on the cell indicative of an active functional role for mutant p53. Indeed, H1299 cells expressing mutant p53-R175H, p53-R273H or p53-D281G grow at a faster rate compared with a control cell line. Using p53-specific small interfering RNA, we show that the growth rate of mutant p53-expressing cells decreases as mutant p53 level decreases, demonstrating that the increased cellular growth is dependent on p53 expression. Increased growth rate is not observed for H1299 cell clones expressing mutant p53-D281G (L22Q/W23S), which has been shown to be defective in transactivation in transient transcriptional assays. This shows that the increased growth rate imparted by mutant p53 in H1299 cells requires the transactivation function of mutant p53. By performing microarray hybridization analyses, we show that constitutive expression of three common p53 mutants (p53-R175H, p53-R273H, and p53-D281G) in H1299 human lung carcinoma cells evokes regulation of a common set of genes, a significant number of which are involved in cell growth regulation. Predictably, H1299 cells expressing p53-D281G (L22Q/W23S) are defective in up-regulating a number of these genes. The differences in expression profiles induced by individual p53 mutants in the cells may be representative of the p53 mutants and how they can affect gene expression resulting in the observed "gain of function" phenotypes (i.e., increased growth rate, decreased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents, and so forth).

17567834
Telomere length in peripheral blood cells of germline TP53 mutation carriers is shorter than that of normal individuals of corresponding age
Background:
        
      
      A decrease in the age at cancer onset and increase in cancer incidence in successive generations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families with germline TP53 mutations have been previously described. In the current study a possible relation was analyzed between telomere length and cancer onset in TP53 mutation carriers.

18937320
Identification of a novel TP53 germline mutation in a large Italian Li-Fraumeni syndrome Family


24702488
Genetic evaluation based on family history and Her2 status correctly identifies TP53 mutations in very early onset breast cancer cases
Currently, hereditary breast cancer is being attributed to more than 20 genes of differing penetrance. Although BRCA1 and BRCA2 are still the genes of reference for breast cancer susceptibility, extreme breast cancer phenotypes may be the result of deleterious alleles of other genes. Here, we report three families with early-onset breast cancer that were initially referred for BRCA1/BRCA2 genetic testing. They were diagnosed with breast cancer at an extraordinarily early age. On the basis of their extensive family history, which included multiple cancer types, and their Her2 status, they were suspected for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Indeed, all three probands were found to harbor TP53 tumor suppressor gene mutations. These included p.C275X, described here for the first time, as well as p.R213X and p.Y220C, which have been described in the past. Our conclusion is that decisions on genetic analysis for inherited early onset breast cancer should always be based on detailed pedigree information, combined with Her2 status.

26270727
Clinical Actionability of Multigene Panel Testing for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Risk Assessment
Importance:
        
      
      The practice of genetic testing for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (HBOC) is rapidly evolving owing to the recent introduction of multigene panels. While these tests may identify 40% to 50% more individuals with hereditary cancer gene mutations than does testing for BRCA1/2 alone, whether finding such mutations will alter clinical management is unknown.

16551709
Spectrum of mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, and TP53 in families at high risk of breast cancer
Context:
        
      
      Genetic testing for inherited mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 has become integral to the care of women with a severe family history of breast or ovarian cancer, but an unknown number of patients receive negative (ie, wild-type) results when they actually carry a pathogenic BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Furthermore, other breast cancer genes generally are not evaluated.

25293557
Germline TP53 mutations is common in patients with two early-onset primary malignancies


15850016
Primary orbital liposarcoma in Li-Fraumeni cancer family syndrome: a case report
Aims and background:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to describe a case of primary orbital liposarcoma in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

26556299
Germline Variants in Targeted Tumor Sequencing Using Matched Normal DNA
Importance:
        
      
      Tumor genetic sequencing identifies potentially targetable genetic alterations with therapeutic implications. Analysis has concentrated on detecting tumor-specific variants, but recognition of germline variants may prove valuable as well.

27616075
Gene panel sequencing in familial breast/ovarian cancer patients identifies multiple novel mutations also in genes others than BRCA1/2
Breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC) predisposition has been attributed to a number of high- and moderate to low-penetrance susceptibility genes. With the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) simultaneous testing of these genes has become feasible. In this monocentric study, we report results of panel-based screening of 14 BC/OC susceptibility genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, RAD51D, CHEK2, PALB2, ATM, NBN, CDH1, TP53, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2) in a group of 581 consecutive individuals from a German population with BC and/or OC fulfilling diagnostic criteria for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing including 179 with a triple-negative tumor. Altogether we identified 106 deleterious mutations in 105 (18%) patients in 10 different genes, including seven different exon deletions. Of these 106 mutations, 16 (15%) were novel and only six were found in BRCA1/2. To further characterize mutations located in or nearby splicing consensus sites we performed RT-PCR analysis which allowed confirmation of pathogenicity in 7 of 9 mutations analyzed. In PALB2, we identified a deleterious variant in six cases. All but one were associated with early onset BC and a positive family history indicating that penetrance for PALB2 mutations is comparable to BRCA2. Overall, extended testing beyond BRCA1/2 identified a deleterious mutation in further 6% of patients. As a downside, 89 variants of uncertain significance were identified highlighting the need for comprehensive variant databases. In conclusion, panel testing yields more accurate information on genetic cancer risk than assessing BRCA1/2 alone and wide-spread testing will help improve penetrance assessment of variants in these risk genes.

19012332
Somatic TP53 mutation mosaicism in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
We present a girl who developed adrenocortical adenoma at the age of 1 year and osteosarcoma at the age of 5 years. There was no history of cancer in her parents and their relatives. However, both tumors were typical for the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), and the patient met criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. A mutation in codon 282 (Arg282Trp) was identified in her blood lymphocyte genomic DNA. The substitution was found in neither of her parents, which indicated a possibility of a de novo mutation. Unexpectedly, sequencing of the DNA of the patient repeatedly showed allelic imbalance in favor of the normal allele. This observation prompted us to investigate the putative somatic mosaicism in the patient consisting of normal cells and cells heterozygous for the mutation. The imbalance was also examined in two other non-invasively sampled tissues, buccal cells, and cells from the urine sediment, and sequencing was confirmed with two other independent methods. While the findings in blood and the urine sediment were similar, in buccal cells both alleles were present in equal amounts. The allele ratio in lymphocytes was consistent with a mosaic where about 2/3 of cells carried two normal alleles and only 1/3 was heterozygous for the mutation. Despite the mosaicism the girl developed two early childhood tumors of mesodermal origin, and her phenotype was thus not milder than that of other germline TP53 mutation carriers. To our knowledge this is the first description of somatic mosaicism for a de novo TP53 mutation in LFS.

15173255
Germline mutations of the E-cadherin(CDH1) and TP53 genes, rather than of RUNX3 and HPP1, contribute to genetic predisposition in German gastric cancer patients


12019170
Initiation of human astrocytoma by clonal evolution of cells with progressive loss of p53 functions in a patient with a 283H TP53 germ-line mutation: evidence for a precursor lesion
Little is known about the genetic and molecular events leading to the early stages of human astrocytoma formation. To examine this issue, we analyzed the significance of sequential accumulation of two somatic point mutations (R267W and E258D) in the TP53 gene during the initiation of astrocytoma in a patient born with a single germ-line p53 point mutation (R283H). We adapted a p53 transcriptional assay in yeast to establish the temporal occurrence and allelic distribution of the p53 mutations present in the patient and characterized these mutations through functional assays and structural modeling. Our results show that the first somatic mutation occurred at codon 267 on the p53 allele harboring the germ-line mutation R283H, whereas the second somatic mutation occurred in the remaining wild-type (wt) allele at codon 258. These two mutations induced the formation of tumor cells with the genotype p53(267W+283H/258D), which comprised 70% of the cells in the primary WHO grade II astrocytoma. Another 8% of cells within the tumor had the partially mutated genotype p53(267W+283H/WT) and represented the remnants of a clinically undetectable intermediate stage of astrocytic neoplastic transformation. The remaining 22% of cells had the constitutive p53(283H/WT) genotype and likely consisted of nontumor cells. Functional analysis of the p53 alleles present in the patient's tumor indicated that the germ-line p53(R283H) could transactivate the CDKN1A((p21, WAF1, cip1, SDI1)) but not the BAX gene and retained the ability to induce growth arrest of human glioblastoma cells. The p53(R267W+R283H) and p53(E258D) were incapable of transactivating either promoter or inducing growth arrest. Modeling of p53 interaction with DNA suggests that R283H mutation may weaken the sequence-specific interaction of p53 lysine 120 with the BAX gene but not the CDKN1A p53-responsive elements. Taken together, these results have characterized, for the first time, the genetic events defining a clinically undetectable precursor lesion leading to a grade II astrocytoma. They also suggest that astrocytoma initiation in this patient resulted from monoclonal evolution driven by a sequential loss of proapoptotic and growth arrest functions of p53.

30309722
Patients with BRCA mutations have superior outcomes after intraperitoneal chemotherapy in optimally resected high grade ovarian cancer
Objectives:
        
      
      To compare the outcomes after intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy in patients with and without pathogenic BRCA mutations.

29205322
A targeted sequencing panel identifies rare damaging variants in multiple genes in the cranial neural tube defect, anencephaly
Neural tube defects (NTDs) affecting the brain (anencephaly) are lethal before or at birth, whereas lower spinal defects (spina bifida) may lead to lifelong neurological handicap. Collectively, NTDs rank among the most common birth defects worldwide. This study focuses on anencephaly, which despite having a similar frequency to spina bifida and being the most common type of NTD observed in mouse models, has had more limited inclusion in genetic studies. A genetic influence is strongly implicated in determining risk of NTDs and a molecular diagnosis is of fundamental importance to families both in terms of understanding the origin of the condition and for managing future pregnancies. Here we used a custom panel of 191 NTD candidate genes to screen 90 patients with cranial NTDs (n = 85 anencephaly and n = 5 craniorachischisis) with a targeted exome sequencing platform. After filtering and comparing to our in-house control exome database (N = 509), we identified 397 rare variants (minor allele frequency, MAF < 1%), 21 of which were previously unreported and predicted damaging. This included 1 frameshift (PDGFRA), 2 stop-gained (MAT1A; NOS2) and 18 missense variations. Together with evidence for oligogenic inheritance, this study provides new information on the possible genetic causation of anencephaly.

10697617
Two cases of osteosarcoma occurring as second malignancy of childhood cancer
We report on two patients in whom osteosarcoma occurred as second malignancy of childhood cancer. One patient had a malignant teratoma and the other adrenocortical carcinoma as the primary cancer. The emergence of cancer in cured cases and long-term survival cases of childhood cancer may result in an increase in the number of osteosarcomas seen in adolescence occurring as second malignancy. Anti-cancer drugs in large does were used for the treatment of a malignant teratoma in the former. These anti-cancer drugs may be involved in the occurrence of the second malignancy. In the latter, the patient has the germ-line mutation of p53 tumor suppressor gene, so genetic factors are presumably related to the occurrence of the second malignancy.

18762572
Identification of a novel TP53 germline mutation E285V in a rare case of paediatric adrenocortical carcinoma and choroid plexus carcinoma
Paediatric choroid plexus carcinomas (CPC) and adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) are exceedingly rare tumours, each occurring at an annual rate of 0.3 cases per million children or less. Although both tumour types are associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), the penetrance of germline TP53 mutations in CPC remains to be established. We report here a young boy without a family history of cancer who presented with CPC and subsequently ACC. Genetic testing revealed a novel de novo germline TP53 mutation (E285V). Neither tumour underwent loss of heterozygosity. Consistent with this observation, functional analyses demonstrated that E285V acts as a dominant negative mutant that is defective in regulating target gene expression, growth suppression and apoptosis. These results further strengthen the association between germline TP53 mutations and childhood CPC, even when occurring in the absence of familial tumour susceptibility.

1569604
Detection of novel germ-line p53 mutations in diverse-cancer-prone families identified by selecting patients with childhood adrenocortical carcinoma
Background:
        
      
      Germ-line p53 mutations appear to be inherited among the members of families diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). The mutations detected in those families to date have been clustered in exon 7 of the p53 gene and, typically, have been single-base substitutions resulting in amino acid changes.

22878818
Chest wall leiomyosarcoma after breast-conservative therapy for early-stage breast cancer in a young woman with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is one of the most penetrant forms of familial cancer susceptibility syndromes, characterized by early age at tumor onset and a wide spectrum of malignant tumors. Identifying LFS in patients with cancer is clinically imperative because they have an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation and are more likely to develop radiation-induced secondary malignancies. This case report describes a young woman whose initial presentation of LFS was early-onset breast cancer and whose treatment of this primary malignancy with breast conservation likely resulted in a secondary malignancy arising in her radiation field. As seen in this case, most breast cancers in patients with LFS exhibit a triple-positive phenotype (estrogen receptor-positive/progesterone receptor-positive/HER2-positive). Although this patient met classic LFS criteria based on age and personal and family history of cancer, the NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology for Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian Cancer endorse genetic screening for TP53 mutations in a subset of patients with early-onset breast cancer, even in the absence of a suggestive family history, because of the potential for de novo TP53 mutations.

15368100
A TP53-truncating germline mutation (E287X) in a family with characteristics of both hereditary diffuse gastric cancer and Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Mutations in CDH1, which encodes E-cadherin, have been associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) in Western populations but have not been shown to play a major role in Asians. Recently, a patient with familial gastric cancer (FGC) was shown to harbor a germline mutation in the TP53 gene, which encodes p53 and has been previously associated with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS). To determine whether mutations in TP53 are associated with FGC in Asians, we screened the entire coding region of TP53 in probands from 23 Korean FGC families. We identified a nonsense (E287X) TP53 germline mutation in a family whose history is compatible with both HDGC and LFS. Two members of this family (SNU-G2) were afflicted with brain tumors, seven with gastric cancers, two with sarcomas, and one with both gastric cancer and a sarcoma. The E287X TP53 mutation segregated with the cancer phenotype in the family members from whom DNA samples were available. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a large family with both HDGC and LFS. Our results suggest that TP53 mutational screening in FGC families should be interpreted with caution because additional TP53 mutation-carrying HDGC families may also show LFS-related phenotypes.

27374712
Germline TP53 Mutation and Clinical Characteristics of Korean Patients With Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Little is known of the mutation and tumor spectrum of Korean patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Owing to the rarity of LFS, few cases have been reported in Korea thus far. This study aimed to retrospectively review the mutations and clinical characteristics of Korean patients with LFS.

28502725
Molecular Diagnosis of Mosaic Overgrowth Syndromes Using a Custom-Designed Next-Generation Sequencing Panel
Recent studies have discovered a group of overgrowth syndromes, such as congenital lipomatous overgrowth with vascular, epidermal, and skeletal anomalies (CLOVES) syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria (MCAP) syndrome, are caused by somatic activating variants in genes involved in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mechanistic target of rapamycin pathway. Because of the low-abundance nature of these variants, Sanger sequencing often yields negative results. We have developed and validated a next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel that targets all known variants associated with these syndromes. Fifty cases, including two prenatal cases, were tested using the panel. A pathogenic variant in the PIK3CA, PIK3R2, or AKT1 gene was identified in 28 of the 50 cases with the variant allele frequencies ranging from 1.0% to 49.2%. These variants were only present in the affected tissues in most of the cases, demonstrating a causal role in the development of these diseases. In vitro cell culture showed significant enrichment of the cells harboring variant alleles, suggesting that these variants render growth advantages to mutant cells. Phenotype-genotype correlation analysis showed PIK3CA mutation hotspots at residues E542, E545, and H1047 are often associated with CLOVES syndrome, whereas PIK3CA G914R is preferentially related to MCAP. We thus demonstrate that NGS technology is highly sensitive for detecting low-level mosaicism and can facilitate clinical diagnosis of mosaic overgrowth syndromes in both prenatal and postnatal settings.

10435620
p53 compound heterozygosity in a severely affected child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
The Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare, dominantly inherited syndrome that features high risk of cancers in childhood and early adulthood. Affected families tend to develop bone and soft tissue sarcomas, breast cancers, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas. In some kindreds, the genetic abnormality associated with this cancer phenotype is a heterozygous germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Recently, we identified one patient who presented in early childhood with multiple primary cancers and who harbored three germline p53 alterations (R156H and R267Q on the maternal allele and R290H on the paternal allele). To classify the biologic effects of these alterations, functional properties of each of the p53 mutants were examined using in vitro assays of cellular growth suppression and transcriptional activation. Each amino acid substitution conferred partial or complete loss of wild-type p53 function, but the child completed normal embryonic development. This observation has not been previously reported in a human, but is consistent with observations of normal embryogenesis in p53-deficient mice.

16437140
Acute myelogenous leukemia in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome treated with valproic acid, theophyllamine and all-trans retinoic acid: a case report


10484981
Hereditary TP53 codon 292 and somatic P16INK4A codon 94 mutations in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder that is characterized by various types of cancer in childhood and adult cases. Although hereditary TP53 mutation is very rare in different human cancers, it has been frequently reported in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. On the other hand, hereditary mutations of TP57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A, which affect the cell cycle similar to TP53, were observed in some types of cancer. In a Turkish family with the diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, we analyzed the mutation pattern of TP53, P57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A in the peripheral blood, and loss of heterozygosity (homo/hemizygous deletion) pattern of TP53 and P15INK4B/P16INK4A in two tumor tissues. The propositus had a seminoma, his daughter a medulloblastoma, and one of his healthy cousins, a TP53 codon 292 missense point mutation (AAA-->ATA; Lys-->Ile) in the peripheral blood cells. Tumor tissue obtained from the propositus with the seminoma revealed loss of heterozygosity in the TP53 gene. In the analyses of tumor tissues from the propositus and his daughter, a P16INK4A codon 94 missense point mutation (GCG-->GAG; Ala-->Glu) was observed with the hereditary TP53 mutation. P16INK4A codon 94 mutation observed in our family is a novel mutation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. No other gene alteration in TP53, P57KIP2, P15INK4B, and P16INK4A was observed. Existence of the P16INK4A mutation and the hereditary TP53 mutation with or without loss of heterozygosity in the TP53 gene (seminoma/medulloblastoma) may be evidence for a common mechanism involved in tumorogenesis. The gene alterations in TP53 and P16INK4A genes may be used as tumor markers in our family.

24251760
Spitzoid melanoma in a child with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Spitzoid melanoma of childhood is a rare malignancy. The histological features are at the upper end of a range encompassing Spitz nevus and atypical Spitz tumor, the unifying features including large oval, fusiform or polygonal melanocytes with abundant homogeneous-appearing cytoplasma and large vesicular nuclei. The presence of a "bottom-heavy" pattern, strikingly enlarged nuclei and nucleoli in both the upper and lower portions of the lesion, and deep mitotic figures are among the findings that distinguish most of the Spitzoid melanomas from Spitz nevi and atypical Spitz tumors. There are no syndromic associations reported for this malignancy. We report the occurrence of choroid plexus carcinoma, Spitzoid melanoma, and myelodysplasia in a child who was found to carry a germline mutation for TP53. While choroid plexus carcinoma and myelodysplasia have relatively frequently been described, melanomas have been very rarely described in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The association of Spitzoid melanoma with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, especially in a pediatric patient, has not been reported before.

12610779
Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk
To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.

22311583
Prevalence of TP53 germ line mutations in young Pakistani breast cancer patients
Women from Pakistan and India are more often diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer than Caucasian women. Given that only 12% of Pakistani women diagnosed with breast cancer at or before 30 years of age have previously been shown to harbor germ line mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2, the genetic causes of the majority of early-onset cases are unexplained. Since germ line mutations in the tumor suppressor gene TP53 predispose women to early-onset breast cancer, we assessed the prevalence of TP53 mutations in 105 early-onset breast cancer patients from Pakistan, who had previously been found to be negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ line mutations. The patient group included 67 women diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer at or before age 30 with no family history of breast or ovarian cancer (EO30NFH group) and 38 women diagnosed with breast cancer at or before age 40 with one or more first- or second-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer (EO40FH group). Mutation analysis of the complete TP53 coding region was performed using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography analysis, followed by DNA sequencing of variant fragments. One deleterious mutation, c.499-500delCA in exon 5, was identified in the 105 breast cancer patients (1%). This mutation is novel in the germ line and has not been described in other populations. It was detected in a 28-year-old patient with no family history of breast or ovarian cancer. This mutation is rare as it was not detected in additional 157 recently recruited non-BRCA1 and non-BRCA2-associated early-onset breast cancer patients. Our findings show that TP53 mutations may account for a minimal portion of early-onset breast cancer in Pakistan.

19930417
Beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 wild-type breast and/or ovarian cancer families: germline mutations in TP53 and PTEN


15784129
A chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case with del (12) (p12) in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a familial cancer syndrome characterized by different tumors and hereditary p53 mutations. Here, a chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family with del (12) (p12) cytogenetic abnormality was presented. A hereditary p53 mutation (pro309ser) supported the Li-Fraumeni syndrome diagnosis in this family. This syndrome was characterized by the clonal myeloproliferative accumulation in bone marrow and peripheral blood with negative bcr/abl gene rearrangement finding. The etiology of this rare syndrome is still unclear. This is the only chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome case reported in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family. Del (12)(p12) was observed in leukemias except chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome. The deletion in chromosome 12p12 with hereditary p53 mutation should have a critical role in chronic myeloid leukemia-like syndrome etiology in our case.

27449771
Multiple rare variants in high-risk pancreatic cancer-related genes may increase risk for pancreatic cancer in a subset of patients with and without germline CDKN2A mutations
The risk of pancreatic cancer (PC) is increased in melanoma-prone families but the causal relationship between germline CDKN2A mutations and PC risk is uncertain, suggesting the existence of non-CDKN2A factors. One genetic possibility involves patients having mutations in multiple high-risk PC-related genes; however, no systematic examination has yet been conducted. We used next-generation sequencing data to examine 24 putative PC-related genes in 43 PC patients with and 23 PC patients without germline CDKN2A mutations and 1001 controls. For each gene and the four pathways in which they occurred, we tested whether PC patients (overall or CDKN2A+ and CDKN2A- cases separately) had an increased number of rare nonsynonymous variants. Overall, we identified 35 missense variants in PC patients, 14 in CDKN2A+ and 21 in CDKN2A- PC cases. We found nominally significant associations for mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) in all PC patients and for ATM, CPA1, and PMS2 in CDKN2A- PC patients. Further, nine CDKN2A+ and four CDKN2A- PC patients had rare potentially deleterious variants in multiple PC-related genes. Loss-of-function variants were only observed in CDKN2A- PC patients, with ATM having the most pathogenic variants. Also, ATM variants (n = 5) were only observed in CDKN2A- PC patients with a family history that included digestive system tumors. Our results suggest that a subset of PC patients may have increased risk because of germline mutations in multiple PC-related genes.

31567591
Targeted germline sequencing of patients with three or more primary melanomas reveals high rate of pathogenic variants
Individuals with multiple primary melanomas have rates of germline CDKN2A pathogenic variants of 3%-18%, and are also frequent carriers of variants in the melanocortin-1 receptor. Few patients with numerous (≥3) primary melanomas have been studied with respect to these or other potential germline pathogenic variants. We investigated 46 patients with ≥3 primary melanomas (3, n = 17; 4, n = 14; 5-14, n = 15) to determine if higher rates of germline pathogenic variants of CDKN2A, MC1R, or other cancer genes could explain their extreme melanoma phenotype. Most (43/46, 93%) patients had variants in MC1R and 11/46 (24%) had CDKN2A pathogenic variants, but only male sex and having two variants in MC1R correlated with increasing number of melanomas. Panel screening of 56 other cancer predisposition genes did not reveal other germline pathogenic variants associated with melanoma (CDK4, BAP1, POT1), although pathogenic variants in TP53, CHEK2, and BRCA2 were present in three separate patients and some patients had variants of uncertain significance. In summary, targeted germline sequencing of patients with ≥3 primary melanomas revealed a high rate of pathogenic variants in CDKN2A and other known cancer genes. Although further investigation of these pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain significance is needed, these results support cancer gene panel testing in individuals diagnosed with ≥3 melanomas.

24448499
Integrated analysis of germline and somatic variants in ovarian cancer
We report the first large-scale exome-wide analysis of the combined germline-somatic landscape in ovarian cancer. Here we analyse germline and somatic alterations in 429 ovarian carcinoma cases and 557 controls. We identify 3,635 high confidence, rare truncation and 22,953 missense variants with predicted functional impact. We find germline truncation variants and large deletions across Fanconi pathway genes in 20% of cases. Enrichment of rare truncations is shown in BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2. In addition, we observe germline truncation variants in genes not previously associated with ovarian cancer susceptibility (NF1, MAP3K4, CDKN2B and MLL3). Evidence for loss of heterozygosity was found in 100 and 76% of cases with germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 truncations, respectively. Germline-somatic interaction analysis combined with extensive bioinformatics annotation identifies 222 candidate functional germline truncation and missense variants, including two pathogenic BRCA1 and 1 TP53 deleterious variants. Finally, integrated analyses of germline and somatic variants identify significantly altered pathways, including the Fanconi, MAPK and MLL pathways.

15073606
Multifocal intrafollicular granulosa cell tumor of the ovary associated with an unusual germline p53 mutation
A 23-year-old woman presented with a 7 cm right multicystic mass in the ovary, which corresponded microscopically to an unusual lesion consisting of a multifocal granulosa cell tumor with intrafollicular ('in situ') growth involving two-thirds of mature follicles. Stromal invasion was found in only one area where neoplastic follicles coalesced. Granulosa cells had atypical, bizarre TP53 positive nuclei with hyperchromatism, abundant mitoses and numerous hyaline globules. The contralateral ovary was normal. From the age of 10 years, the patient had a complex medical history of multiple tumors, including telangiectatic osteosarcoma, typical and malignant phyllodes tumor, reticulohistiocytoma of skin, carcinomas of the breast and lipo- and leiomyosarcoma. The female genital tract also harbored myometrial leiomyomas and an early endometrial carcinoma. Retrospective histologic study of all mesenchymal neoplasms in this patient showed, the conspicuous presence of similar bizarre TP53 positive cells with hyaline globules in all the mesenchymal neoplasms. In the genetic study, a germline p53 gene mutation was detected in exon 10, codon 336, generating a stop codon in the oligomerization domain of the protein (E336X). A further p53 mutation was found in exon 7 in the granulosa cell tumor. Mutation occurred de novo since there was no history of tumors in any family members, all of whom had a wild-type p53. Although this patient shows a typical tumor phenotype of Li Fraumeni syndrome, the germline mutation corresponded to a highly unusual mutated domain, which is similar to the one found in childhood malignant adrenocortical tumor; also a rare neoplasm that originates in adrenocortical cells; which are closely related, both functionally and embryologically, to granulosa cells.

9150393
Two functional assays employed to detect an unusual mutation in the oligomerisation domain of p53 in a Li-Fraumeni like family
Previous investigations of a Li - Fraumeni like family (Barnes et al., 1992) demonstrated that both the proband and her mother had elevated p53 protein levels in both tumour tissue and normal tissue at sites distant from the tumour, although no mutation was found in the p53 gene. In the present study two recently described functional assays for p53, an apoptotic assay and the functional assay for the separation of alleles in yeast (FASAY), have been employed to study the functional activity of p53 from this patient. The results of the apoptotic assay demonstrated that this patient had a p53 functional defect and the FASAY result suggested that this defect was in fact a germline mutation of the p53 gene. A point mutation of codon 337, which results in an amino acid substitution of a cysteine for an arginine, was demonstrated initially in cDNA and was confirmed by sequencing of genomic DNA. This is an unusual mutation as it is in the oligomerisation domain of p53, in contrast to the majority of p53 mutations which are in the core DNA binding domain. This mutation results in a protein which still retains partial transactivational activity in the FASAY. The mutation of codon 337 is only the second reported case of a germline missense mutation occurring in the oligomerisation domain of p53.

9704931
Characterization of the oligomerization defects of two p53 mutants found in families with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome
Recently two germline mutations in the oligomerization domain of p53 have been identified in patients with Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like Syndromes. We have used biophysical and biochemical methods to characterize these two mutants in order to better understand their functional defects and the role of the p53 oligomerization domain (residues 325-355) in oncogenesis. We find that residues 310-360 of the L344P mutant are monomeric, apparently unfolded and cannot interact with wild-type (WT) p53. The full length L344P protein is unable to bind sequence specifically to DNA and is therefore an inactive, but not a dominant negative mutant. R337C, on the other hand, can form dimers and tetramers, can hetero-oligomerize with WTp53 and can bind to a p53 consensus element. However, the thermal stability of R337C is much lower than that of WTp53 and at physiological temperatures more than half of this mutant is less than tetrameric. Thus, the R337C mutant retains some functional activity yet leads to a predisposition to cancer, suggesting that even partial inactivation of p53 oligomerization is sufficient for accelerated tumour progression.

11753428
A novel mechanism of tumorigenesis involving pH-dependent destabilization of a mutant p53 tetramer
The p53 tumor suppressor requires tetramerization to function as an initiator of cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. Children in southern Brazil that exhibit an elevated incidence of adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) harbor an Arg 337 to His mutation within the tetramerization domain of p53 (p53-R337H; 35 of 36 patients). The mutant tetramerization domain (p53tet-R337H) adopts a native-like fold but is less stable than the wild type domain (p53tet-wt). Furthermore, the stability of p53tet-R337H is highly sensitive to pH in the physiological range; this sensitivity correlates with the protonation state of the mutated His 337. These results demonstrate a pH-sensitive molecular defect of p53 (R337H), suggesting that pH-dependent p53 dysfunction is the molecular basis for these cases of ACC in Brazilian children.

16033918
Penetrance of adrenocortical tumours associated with the germline TP53 R337H mutation
Background:
        
      
      An inherited germline P53 mutation has been identified in cases of childhood adrenocortical carcinoma (ACT), a neoplasm with a high incidence in southern Brazil. The penetrance of ACT in carriers of the point mutation, which encodes an arginine-to-histidine substitution at codon 337 of TP53 (R337H), has not been determined.

28475293
Synonymous mutation in TP53 results in a cryptic splice site affecting its DNA-binding site in an adolescent with two primary sarcomas
Pathologic variants in TP53 are known risk factors for the development of cancer. We report a 17-year-old male who presented with two primary sarcomas. Germline sequencing revealed a novel TP53 c.672 G>A mutation. Sequencing revealed wild-type TP53 in the parents, and there was no history of cancer in first-degree relatives. This de novo synonymous germline mutation results in a 5' cryptic splice site that is bound by U1, resulting in a shift of the splice site by 5 base pairs. The frame shift results in a truncated protein at residue 246, which disrupts the DNA-binding domain of p53.

30709381
Prevalence of germline mutations in the TP53 gene in patients with early-onset breast cancer in the Mexican population
Background:
        
      
      Heterozygous germline TP53 gene mutations result in Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS). Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequent tumor in young women with LFS. An important issue related to BC in the Mexican population is the average age at diagnosis, which is approximately 11 years younger than that of patients in the United States (U.S.) and Europe. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of germline mutations in TP53 among young Mexican BC patients.

23409989
Novel p53 splicing site mutation in Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome with osteosarcoma
We describe a 15-year-old girl with a novel germline p53 splice site mutation who developed an osteosarcoma. She received several cycles of chemotherapy with complete resection of the primary tumor without amputation, and has maintained remission for 18 months. Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome was suspected based on familial history. Sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel germline p53 gene mutation resulting in a G to A transition at position +1 at the donor splice site of intron 6, creating a 6 amino acid insertion. This case provides interesting insight into the phenotype-genotype correlation in LFL syndrome with a TP53 splicing mutation.

22495821
Functional studies of a novel germline p53 splicing mutation identified in a patient with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome
Most p53 mutations identified in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) are missense mutations; splicing mutations have rarely been reported. A novel splicing p53 mutation was identified in a patient with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL). Usually, p53 missense mutants identified in LFS and cancer cells function as dominant negative mutations interfering with wild-type p53 function. However, the mechanism by which p53 haploinsufficiency causes carcinogenesis is not well characterized. In this study, we describe a novel splicing mutation that results in the loss-of-function of p53. These findings suggest a linkage between the loss-of-function type p53 mutation and a LFL phenotype.

26681682
Genetic testing in a cohort of young patients with HER2-amplified breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Young age at diagnosis for breast cancer raises the question of genetic susceptibility. We explored breast cancer susceptibility genes testing on ≤40-year-old patients with HER2-amplified invasive breast cancer.

14656244
Novel p53 germline mutation in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome


20967502
Inherited germline TP53 mutation encodes a protein with an aberrant C-terminal motif in a case of pediatric adrenocortical tumor
Childhood adrenocortical tumor (ACT), a very rare malignancy, has an annual worldwide incidence of about 0.3 per million children younger than 15 years. The association between inherited germline mutations of the TP53 gene and an increased predisposition to ACT was described in the context of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In fact, about two-thirds of children with ACT have a TP53 mutation. However, less than 10% of pediatric ACT cases occur in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, suggesting that inherited low-penetrance TP53 mutations play an important role in pediatric adrenal cortex tumorigenesis. We identified a novel inherited germline TP53 mutation affecting the acceptor splice site at intron 10 in a child with an ACT and no family history of cancer. The lack of family history of cancer and previous information about the carcinogenic potential of the mutation led us to further characterize it. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the non-natural and highly hydrophobic C-terminal segment of the frame-shifted mutant p53 protein may disrupt its tumor suppressor function by causing misfolding and aggregation. Our findings highlight the clinical and genetic counseling dilemmas that arise when an inherited TP53 mutation is found in a child with ACT without relatives with Li-Fraumeni-component tumors.

25269805
Impact of G-quadruplex structures and intronic polymorphisms rs17878362 and rs1642785 on basal and ionizing radiation-induced expression of alternative p53 transcripts
G-quadruplex (G4) structures in intron 3 of the p53 pre-mRNA modulate intron 2 splicing, altering the balance between the fully spliced p53 transcript (FSp53, encoding full-length p53) and an incompletely spliced transcript retaining intron 2 (p53I2 encoding the N-terminally truncated Δ40p53 isoform). The nucleotides forming G4s overlap the polymorphism rs17878362 (A1 wild-type allele, A2 16-base pair insertion) which is in linkage disequilibrium with rs1642785 in intron 2 (c.74+38 G>C). Biophysical and biochemical analyses show rs17878362 A2 alleles form similar G4 structures as A1 alleles although their position is shifted with respect to the intron 2 splice acceptor site. In addition basal FSp53 and p53I2 levels showed allele specific differences in both p53-null cells transfected with reporter constructs or lymphoblastoid cell lines. The highest FSp53 and p53I2 levels were associated with combined rs1642785-GG/rs17878362-A1A1 alleles, whereas the presence of rs1642785-C with either rs17878362 allele was associated with lower p53 pre-mRNA, total TP53, FSp53 and p53I2 levels, due to the lower stability of transcripts containing rs1642785-C. Treatment of lymphoblastoid cell with the G4 binding ligands 360A or PhenDC3 or with ionizing radiation increased FSp53 levels only in cells with rs17878362 A1 alleles, suggesting that under this G4 configuration full splicing is favoured. These results demonstrate the complex effects of intronic TP53 polymorphisms on G4 formation and identify a new role for rs1642785 on mRNA splicing and stability, and thus on the differential expression of isoform-specific transcripts of the TP53 gene.

20127977
DeltaN133p53 expression levels in relation to haplotypes of the TP53 internal promoter region
The transcription of the DeltaN133p53 isoform of the TP53 gene is controlled by an internal promoter region (IPR) containing eight polymorphisms in 11 common haplotypes, following a resequencing of 47 Caucasians. We assayed the functional effects of the commonest six haplotypes on the promoter activity with a luciferase reporter system, in HeLa and 293T cells. These studies showed that different IPR haplotypes are associated with differences in the promoter activity resulting in marked variation in the baseline expression of DeltaN133p53. In vivo quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on human tissues confirmed that the baseline levels of DeltaN133p53 showed haplotype specific differences that paralleled those seen in vitro. When cell lines were treated with camptothecin, the fold-increase in DeltaN133p53 levels was dose-dependent but haplotype-independent (i.e., similar for all the haplotypes). Finally, we used an electrophoretic mobility shift assay to analyze the rs1794287 polymorphism and found changes in the pattern of protein binding. This partially confirmed our in silico analysis showing that the polymorphism rs1794287 can affect the function of the internal promoter by changing its affinity for several transcription factors. Thus, we showed that the expression of DeltaN133p53 is under genetic control, and suggested the presence of interindividual differences underlying this mechanism.

21946351
A germline variant in the TP53 polyadenylation signal confers cancer susceptibility
To identify new risk variants for cutaneous basal cell carcinoma, we performed a genome-wide association study of 16 million SNPs identified through whole-genome sequencing of 457 Icelanders. We imputed genotypes for 41,675 Illumina SNP chip-typed Icelanders and their relatives. In the discovery phase, the strongest signal came from rs78378222[C] (odds ratio (OR) = 2.36, P = 5.2 × 10(-17)), which has a frequency of 0.0192 in the Icelandic population. We then confirmed this association in non-Icelandic samples (OR = 1.75, P = 0.0060; overall OR = 2.16, P = 2.2 × 10(-20)). rs78378222 is in the 3' untranslated region of TP53 and changes the AATAAA polyadenylation signal to AATACA, resulting in impaired 3'-end processing of TP53 mRNA. Investigation of other tumor types identified associations of this SNP with prostate cancer (OR = 1.44, P = 2.4 × 10(-6)), glioma (OR = 2.35, P = 1.0 × 10(-5)) and colorectal adenoma (OR = 1.39, P = 1.6 × 10(-4)). However, we observed no effect for breast cancer, a common Li-Fraumeni syndrome tumor (OR = 1.06, P = 0.57, 95% confidence interval 0.88-1.27).

22706378
Rare TP53 genetic variant associated with glioma risk and outcome
Validation of a recent finding linking a rare variant in TP53 to the risk of glioma, the most common primary brain tumour, is reported here. This study genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs78378222 in 566 glioma cases and 603 controls. The variant 'C' allele (with an allelic frequency of 1.1% in controls) was associated with a 3.5-fold excess in glioma risk (odds ratio 3.54; p=0.0001). Variant carriers had significantly improved survival (hazard ratio 0.52; p=0.009) when compared to non-carriers. The rs78378222 SNP is the first confirmed rare susceptibility variant in glioma. Results may shed light on the aetiology and progression of these tumours.

22800615
A functional germline variant in the P53 polyadenylation signal and risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
Aim:
        
      
      P53 plays a critical role in the maintenance of genomic stability as well as the control of cell growth and apoptosis. Recently, an uncommon P53 genetic variant (rs78378222) was reported to be significantly associated with multiple cancers in Caucasians in a genome-wide association study. rs78378222 locates in the 3'-untranslated region of the P53 gene, and this A-to-C polymorphism results in changes of the AATAAA polyadenylation signal to AATACA, which leads to impaired 3'-end processing of P53 mRNA and decreased P53 expression.

28911001
Whole-exome analysis of a Li-Fraumeni family trio with a novel TP53 PRD mutation and anticipation profile
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a clinically heterogeneous familial cancer predisposition syndrome with autosomal-dominant inheritance caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. We here analyze the genetic background of a family with a 4-year-proband presented with a Li-Fraumeni tumor. The mother developed breast cancer at age 37 and the proband died at age 8. We performed Sanger sequencing and whole-exome sequencing on peripheral blood DNA from proband and relatives. Data analysis selected only high-quality score and depth reads, rare variants and protein impact involving missense, non-sense, frameshift and splice disrupt mutations. Disease implicated variants and predicted deleterious alterations were also chosen. TP53 genetic testing revealed a never reported TP53 deletion arose as de novo mutation in the mother and inherited by the proband. We then performed whole-exome analysis of the trio to uncover inherited variants from the father that potentially worsen the already altered genetic background in the proband. No pathogenic variants were inherited in autosomal recessive, de novo dominant or X-linked recessive manner. Comparing proband and father exome we detected 25 predicted deleterious variants including a nonsense mutation in ERCC3. Those inherited mutations are possible candidate modifiers linked to TP53, explaining the proband accelerated tumor onset compared to the mother and providing a possible explanation of the genetic anticipation event in this Li-Fraumeni family.

33407806
Revisiting multiple erroneous genetic testing results and clinical misinterpretations in a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: lessons for translational medicine
Background:
        
      
      Many cancer patients undergo sophisticated laboratory testing, which requires proper interpretation and interaction between different specialists.

17554785
Identification of a novel p53 in-frame deletion in a Li-Fraumeni-like family
We describe a 2-year-old female with a completely resected cerebral pilocytic astrocytoma who subsequently developed B-progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Her father and paternal uncle were previously diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme. Sequence analysis of the patient's p53 gene revealed a novel germline three base-pair deletion (339_341delCTT) in exon 4, resulting in removal of an evolutionarily conserved phenylalanine amino acid residue at codon 113. The same mutation was found in the patient's two clinically unaffected siblings. The in-frame deletion we describe has not previously been reported and adds to our understanding of the biologic effects of p53 gene mutation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS).

19250386
A molecular approach for identifying individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome who have a limited family history


15342977
Prenatal diagnosis in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Purpose:
        
      
      The hallmark of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer syndrome, is constitutional TP53 mutation. The authors addressed the complex question of predictive prenatal genetic testing for cancer risk associated with inheritance of TP53 mutation.

25047674
EGFR-mutated lung cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome
This is a revised case report of a 52 year old Caucasian female with Li-Fraumeni syndrome with a rare TP53 mutation, who was treated for breast cancer and later developed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutated non-small cell lung cancer.

8780740
A novel deletion within exon 6 of TP53 in a family with Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, and LOH in a benign lesion from a mutation carrier
We report here a family with some of the characteristics of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (Li-Fraumeni-like) in which there is a 2 base pair deletion within exon 6 of TP53 in two affected individuals. Of particular interest in this family is a study of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the TP53 gene, and the finding that there is LOH in all cancers available for study from mutation carriers, and additionally from a benign endometrial polyp from one of those patients. Two other family members, one with a rectal carcinoma aged 55, the other with two separate benign lesions under the age of 45, were both wild-type for the TP53 mutation.

8639798
The p53 gene in pediatric therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia
We investigated the frequency of p53 mutations in 19 pediatric cases of therapy-related leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. Eleven children presented with acute myeloid leukemia, one with mixed-lineage leukemia, two with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and five with myelodysplasia at times ranging from 11 months to 9 years after a primary cancer diagnosis. The primary cancers, which included 11 solid tumors and eight leukemias, were treated with various combinations of DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors, alkylating agents, or irradiation. Leukemic or myelodysplastic marrows were screened for possible mutations by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of p53 exons 4 to 8. The only observed mutation was an inherited 2-basepair deletion at codon 209 in exon 6 that would shift the open reading frame, create a premature termination codon, and foreshorten the resultant protein. Prior therapy in this patient included DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors, alkylating agents, and irradiation. The secondary leukemia presented as myelodysplasia with monosomies of chromosomes 5 and 7 and abnormalities of chromosome 17. Although the primary cancer was an embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and there was a family history of cancer, the case did not fulfill the clinical criteria for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. This study suggests that germline p53 mutations may predispose some children to therapy-related leukemia and myelodysplasia, but that p53 mutations otherwise are infrequent in this setting.

30322717
Germline pathogenic variants identified in women with ovarian tumors
Objective:
        
      
      The recognition of genes implicated in ovarian cancer risk beyond BRCA1, BRCA2, and the Lynch syndrome genes has increased the variety of testing options available to providers and patients. We report the frequency of pathogenic variants identified among individuals with ovarian cancer undergoing clinical genetic testing via a multi-gene hereditary cancer panel.

9723024
A novel TP53 germ-line mutation identified in a girl with a primitive neuroectodermal tumor and her father
A search of TP53 mutations was undertaken in a series of 51 pediatric brain tumors. The only germ-line mutation was detected in a 9-year-old girl with a PNET. Her family history was unremarkable for neoplastic disease, except for the paternal grandfather, who died of a gallbladder carcinoma at an advanced age. The mutation was a thymine deletion at the first base of codon 241, leading to termination codon at position 246 that has not previously been reported. This mutation was found to be inherited from the proband's father, who was healthy at age 40. In the tumoral sample, loss of heterozygosity in several 17p markers was found, the only TP53 allele preserved in the tumor was the mutated one. The presence of two short tandem repeats and two different palindromic sequences spanning the deletion lead us to propose the predisposition of this region to forming a complex secondary structure during replication. Consequently, it could have facilitated the present deletion. Furthermore, six other short deletions affecting--partially or totally--the region implicated in the folding model that we propose have been described in the literature. These findings confirm that this sequence represents a hotspot of deletion in the TP53 gene.

30886117
From uncertainty to pathogenicity: clinical and functional interrogation of a rare TP53 in-frame deletion
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Although more than 200 missense and null TP53 mutations are well established as disease-causing, little is known about the pathogenicity and cancer risks associated with small in-frame deletions. This leads to challenges in variant classification and subsequent difficulty making a molecular diagnosis. We report the genetic testing process for a pediatric patient diagnosed with an undifferentiated high-grade brain tumor following his mother's diagnosis of early-onset bilateral breast cancer. Sequential testing revealed that both harbored a heterozygous three-nucleotide deletion in exon 7 of TP53 (c.764_766delTCA; I255del), which was classified as a variant of uncertain significance. Because the maternal family history was void of any other LFS spectrum tumors, additional information was needed to effectively classify the variant. Targeted TP53 testing of the patient's maternal grandparents confirmed that neither carried the variant; this new de novo data upgraded the variant classification to likely pathogenic. To assess the impact of this mutation on the encoded p53 protein, additional in vitro analyses were performed. Structural modeling predicted that the deletion of isoleucine at codon 255 would disrupt the architecture of the DNA-binding domain, suggesting that it might negatively impact p53 function. Consistent with this notion, the I255del mutant protein exhibited significantly impaired transcriptional activity and greatly reduced growth suppressive properties, similar to more well-characterized LFS-associated p53 mutants. This report illustrates the importance of seeking additional evidence to assign proper pathogenicity classification, which enables optimal genetic counseling and medical management of individuals with LFS and their at-risk relatives.

8685209
Ovarian, peritoneal, and endometrial serous carcinoma: clonal origin of multifocal disease
The clonality of disseminated serous carcinoma involving the ovary, peritoneum, and, occasionally, the endometrium is controversial. Histopathologic examination alone cannot unequivocally distinguish between a monoclonal origin and a multicentric origin. Two patients with peritoneal serous carcinoma with minimal ovarian involvement (one with endometrial serous carcinoma), nine patients with stage III bilateral ovarian carcinoma, and one patient with stage III bilateral carcinosarcoma were studied for clonality. One patient with ovarian carcinoma that recurred after chemotherapy was also studied. Previous analyses of single frozen tumor specimens from these patients had identified different p53 gene mutations in each patient. To test the hypothesis that the disseminated cancers had a monoclonal origin, we assayed DNA from numerous foci from each patient to determine whether the known p53 mutation was present in each specimen. Identical mutations were detected in the tumor foci from each patient with peritoneal dissemination and minimal ovarian involvement, including one patient with an endometrial serous carcinoma as well. In all the patients with bilateral ovarian cancer, the genetic change in p53 was identical in both ovarian tumors. Genetic progression was observed in two patients, one of whom showed a loss of heterozygosity involving the p53 gene in a recurrent tumor. In the second patient, a p53 mutation not present in either ovarian tumor was detected in a metastatic tumor from the omentum. These results strongly suggest that disseminated serous carcinomas, whether primary in the ovary, endometrium, or peritoneum, are of monoclonal rather than multicentric origin; that bilateral stage III ovarian cancers are typically of monoclonal origin; and that additional genetic events involving p53 might occur during progression of these tumors.

11102977
High frequency of recurrent mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Polish families with breast and ovarian cancer
Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes result in a significantly increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Other genes involved in an increased predisposition to breast cancer include the TP53 gene, mutated in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. To estimate the frequency of germ-line mutations in these three genes in Upper Silesia, we have analyzed 47 breast/ovarian cancer families from that region. We found five different disease predisposing mutations in 17 (36%) families. Twelve families (25.5%) carried known BRCA1 mutations (5382insC and C61G), four families (8.5%) carried novel BRCA2 mutations (9631delC and 6886delGAAAA), and one family (2%) harbored novel mutation 1095del8 in the TP53 gene, which is the largest germline deletion in coding sequence of this gene identified thus far. The 5382insC mutation in BRCA1 was found in 11 families and the 9631delC mutation in BRCA2 occurred in three families. These two mutations taken together contribute to 82% of all mutations found in this study, and 30% of the families investigated harbor one of these mutations. The very high frequency of common mutations observed in these families can only be compared to that reported for Ashkenazi Jewish, Icelandic, and Russian high-risk families. This frequency, however, may not be representative for the entire Polish population. The observed distribution of mutations will favor routine pre-screening of predisposed families using a simple and cost-effective test.

30146126
De Novo Mutations Activating Germline TP53 in an Inherited Bone-Marrow-Failure Syndrome
Inherited bone-marrow-failure syndromes (IBMFSs) include heterogeneous genetic disorders characterized by bone-marrow failure, congenital anomalies, and an increased risk of malignancy. Many lines of evidence have suggested that p53 activation might be central to the pathogenesis of IBMFSs, including Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) and dyskeratosis congenita (DC). However, the exact role of p53 activation in each clinical feature remains unknown. Here, we report unique de novo TP53 germline variants found in two individuals with an IBMFS accompanied by hypogammaglobulinemia, growth retardation, and microcephaly mimicking DBA and DC. TP53 is a tumor-suppressor gene most frequently mutated in human cancers, and occasional germline variants occur in Li-Fraumeni cancer-predisposition syndrome. Most of these mutations affect the core DNA-binding domain, leading to compromised transcriptional activities. In contrast, the variants found in the two individuals studied here caused the same truncation of the protein, resulting in the loss of 32 residues from the C-terminal domain (CTD). Unexpectedly, the p53 mutant had augmented transcriptional activities, an observation not previously described in humans. When we expressed this mutant in zebrafish and human-induced pluripotent stem cells, we observed impaired erythrocyte production. These findings together with close similarities to published knock-in mouse models of TP53 lacking the CTD demonstrate that the CTD-truncation mutations of TP53 cause IBMFS, providing important insights into the previously postulated connection between p53 and IBMFSs.

22652532
Germline mutations in the DNA damage response genes BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1 and TP53 in patients with therapy related myeloid neoplasms
Background:
        
      
      Therapy related myeloid neoplasms (t-MNs) are complex diseases originating from an interplay between exogenous toxicities and a susceptible organism. It has been hypothesised that in a subset of cases t-MNs develop in the context of hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes.

9595036
A novel germ-line mutation in the noncoding region of the p53 gene in a Li-Fraumeni family
We identified a novel germ-line p53 mutation in the noncoding, nonsplicing regions of a Li-Fraumeni family. Patients belonging to this family included pediatric medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma patients and a breast carcinoma patient. Three positions in the p53 gene were analyzed for loss of heterozygosity (LOH). One of the three loci retained heterozygosity, whereas the other two exhibited LOH. Sequence analysis of the third locus identified a change of 5'-CCGGGTGA-3' to 5'-CCAGGTTGGA-3', 63 bp downstream of exon 6. The mutation was identified in the germ line of the two pediatric patients and in each of the related parents. We excluded any additional mutation in the entire coding region of the p53 gene, including splice-site intronic sequences. Strong positive nuclear staining of the p53 protein was detected in both normal and tumor paraffin-embedded tissues. Eighty-five normal persons were negative for this alteration, which thus supports it as a mutation. These results may indicate that genetic changes within the noncoding region of the p53 gene may serve as an alternative mechanism of activating this gene. Mutations in the noncoding region of this gene should be further studied.

24336192
Age at cancer onset in germline TP53 mutation carriers: association with polymorphisms in predicted G-quadruplex structures
Germline TP53 mutations predispose to multiple cancers defining Li-Fraumeni/Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS/LFL), a disease with large individual disparities in cancer profiles and age of onset. G-quadruplexes (G4s) are secondary structural motifs occurring in guanine tracks, with regulatory effects on DNA and RNA. We analyzed 85 polymorphisms within or near five predicted G4s in TP53 in search of modifiers of penetrance of LFS/LFL in Brazilian cancer families with (n = 35) or without (n = 110) TP53 mutations. Statistical analyses stratified on family structure showed that cancer tended to occur ~15 years later in mutation carriers who also carried the variant alleles of two polymorphisms within predicted G4-forming regions, rs17878362 (TP53 PIN3, 16 bp duplication in intron 3; P = 0.082) and rs17880560 (6 bp duplication in 3' flanking region; P = 0.067). Haplotype analysis showed that this inverse association was driven by the polymorphic status of the remaining wild-type (WT) haplotype in mutation carriers: in carriers with a WT haplotype containing at least one variant allele of rs17878362 or rs17880560, cancer occurred ~15 years later than in carriers with other WT haplotypes (P = 0.019). No effect on age of cancer onset was observed in subjects without a TP53 mutation. The G4 in intron 3 has been shown to regulate alternative p53 messenger RNA splicing, whereas the biological roles of predicted G4s in the 3' flanking region remain to be elucidated. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that G4 polymorphisms in haplotypes of the WT TP53 allele have an impact on LFS/LFL penetrance in germline TP53 mutation carriers.

14647431
A TP53 polymorphism is associated with increased risk of colorectal cancer and with reduced levels of TP53 mRNA
We undertook a case-control study to examine the possible associations of the TP53 variants Arg > Pro at codon 72 and p53PIN3, a 16 bp insertion/duplication in intron 3, with the risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). The p53PIN3 A2 allele (16 bp duplication) was associated with an increased risk (OR 1.55, 95% CI 1.10-2.18, P = 0.012), of the same order of magnitude as that observed in previous studies for other types of cancer. The Pro72 allele was weakly associated with CRC (OR = 1.34, 95% CI 0.98-1.84, P = 0.066). The possible functional role of p53PIN3 was investigated by examining the TP53 mRNA transcripts in 15 lymphoblastoid cell lines with different genotypes. The possibility that the insertion/deletion could lead to alternatively spliced mRNAs was excluded. However, we found reduced levels of TP53 mRNA associated with the A2 allele. In conclusion, the epidemiological study suggests a role for p53PIN3 in tumorigenesis, supported by the in vitro characterization of this variant.

11983757
p53 Genotypes and Haplotypes Associated With Lung Cancer Susceptibility and Ethnicity
Background:
        
      
      The p53 tumor suppressor protein is important in cell-cycle control, apoptosis, and DNA repair. Mutations in p53 have been associated with inherited cancer susceptibility. Because there is a difference in the risk of lung cancer among different ethnic groups, we examined associations between ethnicity and three polymorphisms in p53 (one exonic and two intronic) and haplotypes for the three loci and risk of lung cancer. We also examined the functionality of the p53 variants in apoptosis and DNA repair.

19542078
TP53 PIN3 and MDM2 SNP309 polymorphisms as genetic modifiers in the Li-Fraumeni syndrome: impact on age at first diagnosis
Background:
        
      
      Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes (LFS/LFL), characterised by the development of multiple early onset cancers with heterogeneous tumour patterns, are associated with germline TP53 mutations. Polymorphisms in the TP53 pathway (TP53 PEX4 at codon 72, rs1042522; MDM2 SNP309, rs2279744) have modifier effects on germline TP53 mutations that may account for the individual and familial diversity of tumour patterns.

20017945
Identification of a novel germ-line mutation in the TP53 gene in a Mexican family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Germ-line mutations of the TP53 gene are known to cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome, an autosomal, dominantly inherited, high-penetrance cancer-predisposition syndrome characterized by the occurrence of a variety of cancers, mainly soft tissue sarcomas, adrenocortical carcinoma, leukemia, breast cancer, and brain tumors.

29566657
Germline breast cancer susceptibility gene mutations and breast cancer outcomes
Background:
        
      
      It is unclear whether germline breast cancer susceptibility gene mutations affect breast cancer related outcomes. We wanted to evaluate mutation patterns in 20 breast cancer susceptibility genes and correlate the mutations with clinical characteristics to determine the effects of these germline mutations on breast cancer prognosis.

32930885
Retrospective investigation of hereditary syndromes in patients with medulloblastoma in a single institution
Purpose:
        
      
      To investigate the incidence rate of hereditary disease in patients with medulloblastoma.

12085209
Investigations on a clinically and functionally unusual and novel germline p53 mutation
This report describes an individual with a rare choroid plexus papilloma in adulthood (age 29) after earlier having an osteosarcoma (age 22). The results from this study, and others, suggest that it may be advisable to consider the possibility of a germline p53 mutation in adults presenting with choroid plexus tumours. In the current study automated DNA sequencing of genomic DNA detected a novel germline 7 base pair insertion in exon 5 of the p53 gene in this patient. The alteration in frame would produce amino acid substitutions beginning with alanine to glycine at position 161 and a stop codon at position 182 in the mutated protein. Surprisingly two assays of p53 function gave apparently wild-type results on peripheral blood lymphocytes from this individual. These results led us to carry out more detailed functional tests on the mutant protein. The mutant allele was expressed either at very low levels or not at all in phytohaemagglutinin stimulated lymphocytes. Further, the mutant protein was completely non-functional in terms of its ability to transactivate a series of p53-responsive genes (p21(WAF1), bax, PIG3), to transrepress a target gene and to inhibit colony growth in transfected Saos-2 cells. However, surprisingly, data from irradiated peripheral blood lymphocytes and transfected Saos-2 cells, suggested that this truncated, mutant protein retains significant ability to induce apoptosis.

19671334
[Identification of a novel TP53 germline mutation in one child with adrenocortical carcinoma]
Objective:
        
      
      To detect the germline TP53 gene mutation in a child with pediatric adrenocortical carcinoma (ADCC) in order to provide genetic diagnosis and counseling.

29416929
A novel dysfunctional germline P53 mutation identified in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS), which is a rare dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome, is associated with germline P53 mutations. Mutations of the tumor suppressor protein P53 are associated with more than 50% of human cancers; however, almost 30% of P53 mutations occur rarely and this has raised questions about their significance. It therefore appeared of particular interest that we identified a novel mutation in a patient suffering from breast cancer and fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of LFS. In this study, a patient with remarkable family history developed breast cancer and was diagnosed with LFS. By performing next-generation sequencing on the patient and subsequent verification by Sanger sequencing among other family members, a new germ-line P53 replication error, a trinucleotide repeat mutation in the coding region, was identified in two generations of this Li-Fraumeni family.

29746440
Composite Adrenocortical Carcinoma and Neuroblastoma in an Infant With a TP53 Germline Mutation: A Case Report and Literature Review
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a kind of hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes, and is caused by TP53 gene mutation. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is commonly described as the most closely related tumor with this disease. Here, we present a case of a male infant with composite ACC and neuroblastoma who inherited a TP53 gene mutation from his mother, a 20-year-old carrier without any tumor to date. This TP53 gene mutation may be pathogenic and lead to composite malignancies of ACC and neuroblastoma.

32516327
The function of a heterozygous p53 mutation in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome patient
p53 is one of the most extensively studied proteins in cancer research. Mutations in p53 generally abolish normal p53 function, and some mutants can gain new oncogenic functions. However, the mechanisms underlying p53 mutation-driven cancer remains to be elucidated. Our study investigated the function of a heterozygous p53 mutation (p.Asn268Glufs*4) in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) patient. We used episomal technology to perform somatic reprogramming, and used molecular and cell biology methods to determine the p53 mutation levels in patient-originated induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells at the RNA and protein levels. We found that p53 protein expression was not increased in this patient's somatic cells compared with those of a healthy control. p53 mutation facilitates the proliferation of tumor cells by inhibiting apoptosis and promoting cell division. It can inhibit the efficiency of somatic reprogramming by inhibiting OCT4 expression during reprogramming stage. Moreover, not all p53 mutant iPS cell lines have mutant p53 RNA sequences. A small percentage of mutant p53 mRNA is present in the somatic cells from the patient and his mother. In summary, this p53 mutation can promote tumor cell proliferation, inhibit somatic reprogramming, and exhibit random p53 allelic expression of heterozygous mutations in the patient and iPS cells which may be one of the reasons why the people with p53 mutations develop cancer at random. This finding suggested that mutant p53 allelic expression should be added to the risk forecasting of cancer.

30742731
Feasibility and utility of a panel testing for 114 cancer-associated genes in a clinical setting: A hospital-based study
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor tissue (ie, clinical sequencing) can guide clinical management by providing information about actionable gene aberrations that have diagnostic and therapeutic significance. Here, we undertook a hospital-based prospective study (TOP-GEAR project, 2nd stage) to investigate the feasibility and utility of NGS-based analysis of 114 cancer-associated genes (the NCC Oncopanel test). We examined 230 cases (comprising more than 30 tumor types) of advanced solid tumors, all of which were matched with nontumor samples. Gene profiling data were obtained for 187 cases (81.3%), 111 (59.4%) of which harbored actionable gene aberrations according to the Clinical Practice Guidelines for Next Generation Sequencing in Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment (Edition 1.0) issued by 3 major Japanese cancer-related societies. Twenty-five (13.3%) cases have since received molecular-targeted therapy according to their gene aberrations. These results indicate the utility of tumor-profiling multiplex gene panel testing in a clinical setting in Japan. This study is registered with UMIN Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN 000011141).

18786442
Li-Fraumeni syndrome in a Malaysian kindred
We report on a Malaysian kindred with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The proband was an 8-year-old girl who presented with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the trunk at the age of 8 months and developed a brain recurrence at the age of 7 years, which was 5 years after remission. A younger sister later developed adrenocortical carcinoma at the age of 6 months. Their mother and maternal grandmother were diagnosed with breast cancer at the ages of 26 and 38 years, respectively. TP53 mutation detection in this family revealed a duplication of a GGCGTG motif starting at nucleotide 17579 in exon 10, resulting in an in-frame insertion of two amino acids between residues 334 and 336 in the tetramerization domain of the p53 protein. This mutation was found in the proband and her affected sister as well as her mother. In addition, the mutation was detected in two other siblings (a brother aged 3 years and a sister aged 18 months) who have not yet developed any malignancy. Sequencing of TP53 in the father and two other asymptomatic siblings revealed wild-type TP53. To our knowledge, this is a first report of a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family in Southeast Asia.

9600210
Primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the cerebral hemispheres in two siblings with TP53 germline mutation
AWe report on two siblings (brother and sister) who developed cerebral PNETs at the age of 5 years and 6 months, respectively. Both children were treated by operation followed by polychemotherapy. The brother also received cranio-spinal irradiation. Nevertheless, the children died about 12 months and 24 months post-operatively due to extensive cerebral tumor recurrences. Shortly after having lost both of her children, the mother developed an intra-abdominal tumor, which was resected and histologically diagnosed as ovarian carcinoma. Because of this unusual familial clustering of tumors and a positive history of brain tumors and other cancers in several maternal relatives, we analyzed DNA isolated from both PNETs and the ovarian carcinoma as well as constitutional (leukocyte) DNA from the whole family for mutation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene. This analysis revealed that all tumors were homozygous for a missense mutation at codon 213 (CGA => TGG) resulting in an amino acid exchange from arginine to tryptophane. The same mutation was present in one TP53 allele in the constitutional DNA of the mother and the children, indicating that the mother had transmitted a TP53 germline mutation to both of her children. Analysis of loss of heterozygosity at microsatellite markers from 17p confirmed deletion of the paternal (wild-type) allele in both PNETs. Further investigation of the PNETs by comparative genomic hybridization revealed multiple chromosomal abnormalities. Interestingly, some genomic changes were common to both PNETs, while many others were not, a finding suggesting substantial genomic instability, probably as a consequence of p53 inactivation.

7614454
Complex replication error causes p53 mutation in a Li-Fraumeni family
We demonstrated a germline p53 replication error in two generations of a Li-Fraumeni family affected with liposarcoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, and osteosarcoma. The trinucleotide repeat mutation changed 5'-AGT GTG GTG GTG-3' at codons 215-218 to 5'-AGT TGG TTG GTG GTG-3'. The predicted protein would be elongated by one amino acid (val216-->trp leu) without a change in charge. Detection of p53 in the adrenal tumor by immunostaining suggested that the mutant protein was expressed. Persistence of the mutation in the germline may suggest a defect in DNA repair in the family member first affected. This is the first report where germline transmission of replication-damaged p53 trinucleotide repeats is associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

29325031
Use of deep whole-genome sequencing data to identify structure risk variants in breast cancer susceptibility genes
Functional disruptions of susceptibility genes by large genomic structure variant (SV) deletions in germlines are known to be associated with cancer risk. However, few studies have been conducted to systematically search for SV deletions in breast cancer susceptibility genes. We analysed deep (> 30x) whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data generated in blood samples from 128 breast cancer patients of Asian and European descent with either a strong family history of breast cancer or early cancer onset disease. To identify SV deletions in known or suspected breast cancer susceptibility genes, we used multiple SV calling tools including Genome STRiP, Delly, Manta, BreakDancer and Pindel. SV deletions were detected by at least three of these bioinformatics tools in five genes. Specifically, we identified heterozygous deletions covering a fraction of the coding regions of BRCA1 (with approximately 80kb in two patients), and TP53 genes (with ∼1.6 kb in two patients), and of intronic regions (∼1 kb) of the PALB2 (one patient), PTEN (three patients) and RAD51C genes (one patient). We confirmed the presence of these deletions using real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). Our study identified novel SV deletions in breast cancer susceptibility genes and the identification of such SV deletions may improve clinical testing.

7936651
A germline 2.35 kb deletion of p53 genomic DNA creating a specific loss of the oligomerization domain inherited in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family
The primary genetic cancer predisposing event in many Li-Fraumeni syndrome families is a germline mutation in the p53 gene. We describe an extended Li-Fraumeni family with a germline mutation in the p53 gene involving a deletion of exon 10. The mutation is a 2.35 kilobase intragenic deletion encompassing exon 10, which results in the specific loss of the entire p53 oligomerization domain. This mutation segregates with the cancer phenotype. A lymphoblastoid cell line developed from a mutation carrier shows accumulation of mutant p53 protein by immunoblotting. However, tumor tissues from two affected carriers are negative by immunohistochemical staining. A major structural alteration specifically involving the oligomerization domain of a germline p53 gene has not been previously described and occurs in a region rarely mutated in sporadic tumors. The oligomerization domain is dispensable for many wild-type p53 functions, including transactivation, sequence-specific DNA binding, and suppression of oncogenic transformation. However, the domain appears to be required for transcriptional repression, and DNA strand reassociation. The identification of this mutation in an LFS family may yield insights into the importance of the oligomerization domain for suppressor function of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.

21056402
A common molecular mechanism underlies two phenotypically distinct 17p13.1 microdeletion syndromes
DNA copy-number variations (CNVs) underlie many neuropsychiatric conditions, but they have been less studied in cancer. We report the association of a 17p13.1 CNV, childhood-onset developmental delay (DD), and cancer. Through a screen of over 4000 patients with diverse diagnoses, we identified eight probands harboring microdeletions at TP53 (17p13.1). We used a purpose-built high-resolution array with 93.75% breakpoint accuracy to fine map these microdeletions. Four patients were found to have a common phenotype including DD, hypotonia, and hand and foot abnormalities, constituting a unique syndrome. Notably, these patients were not affected with cancer. Moreover, none of the TP53-deletion patients affected with cancer (n = 4) had neurocognitive impairments. DD patients have larger deletions, which encompass but do not disrupt TP53, whereas cancer-affected patients harbor CNVs with at least one breakpoint within TP53. Most 17p13.1 deletions arise by Alu-mediated nonallelic homologous recombination. Furthermore, we identify a critical genomic region associated with DD and containing six underexpressed genes. We conclude that, although they overlap, 17p13.1 CNVs are associated with distinct phenotypes depending on the position of the breakpoint with respect to TP53. Further, detailed characterization of breakpoints revealed a common formation signature. Future studies should consider whether other loci in the genome also give rise to phenotypically distinct disorders by means of a common mechanism, resulting in a similar formation signature.

21505135
Identification of a novel TP53 cancer susceptibility mutation through whole-genome sequencing of a patient with therapy-related AML
Context:
        
      
      The identification of patients with inherited cancer susceptibility syndromes facilitates early diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. However, in many cases of suspected cancer susceptibility, the family history is unclear and genetic testing of common cancer susceptibility genes is unrevealing.

32624572
Improved structural variant interpretation for hereditary cancer susceptibility using long-read sequencing
Purpose:
        
      
      Structural variants (SVs) may be an underestimated cause of hereditary cancer syndromes given the current limitations of short-read next-generation sequencing. Here we investigated the utility of long-read sequencing in resolving germline SVs in cancer susceptibility genes detected through short-read genome sequencing.

29338689
Variants of cancer susceptibility genes in Korean BRCA1/2 mutation-negative patients with high risk for hereditary breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      We evaluated the incidence and spectrum of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants of cancer susceptibility genes in BRCA1/2 mutation-negative Korean patients with a high risk for hereditary breast cancer using a comprehensive multigene panel that included 35 cancer susceptibility genes.

33606809
Germline molecular data in hereditary breast cancer in Brazil: Lessons from a large single-center analysis
Brazil is the largest country in South America and the most genetically heterogeneous. The aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence of germline pathogenic variants (PVs) in Brazilian patients with breast cancer (BC) who underwent genetic counseling and genetic testing at a tertiary Oncology Center. We performed a retrospective analysis of the medical records of Brazilian patients with BC referred to genetic counseling and genetic testing between August 2017 and August 2019. A total of 224 unrelated patients were included in this study. Premenopausal women represented 68.7% of the cohort. The median age at BC diagnosis was 45 years. Multigene panel testing was performed in 219 patients, five patients performed single gene analysis or family variant testing. Forty-eight germline PVs distributed among 13 genes were detected in 20.5% of the patients (46/224). Eighty-five percent of the patients (91/224) fulfilled NCCN hereditary BC testing criteria. Among these patients, 23.5% harbored PVs (45/191). In the group of patients that did not meet NCCN criteria, PV detection rate was 3% (1/33). A total of 61% of the patients (28/46) harbored a PV in a high-penetrance BC gene: 19 (8.5%) BRCA1/2, 8 (3.5%) TP53, 1 (0.5%) PALB2. Moderate penetrance genes (ATM, CHEK2) represented 15.2% (7/46) of the positive results. PVs detection was statistically associated (p<0.05) with BC diagnosis before age 45, high-grade tumors, bilateral BC, history of multiple primary cancers, and family history of pancreatic cancer. According to the current hereditary cancer guidelines, 17.4% (39/224) of the patients had actionable variants. Nine percent of the patients (20/224) had actionable variants in non-BRCA genes, it represented 43.5% of the positive results and 51.2% of the actionable variants. Considering the observed prevalence of PVs in actionable genes beyond BRCA1/2 (9%, 20/224), multigene panel testing may offer an effective first-tier diagnostic approach in this population.

28878254
Germline Mutations in Cancer Predisposition Genes are Frequent in Sporadic Sarcomas
Associations of sarcoma with inherited cancer syndromes implicate genetic predisposition in sarcoma development. However, due to the apparently sporadic nature of sarcomas, little attention has been paid to the role genetic susceptibility in sporadic sarcoma. To address this, we performed targeted-genomic sequencing to investigate the prevalence of germline mutations in known cancer-associated genes within an Asian cohort of sporadic sarcoma patients younger than 50 years old. We observed 13.6% (n = 9) amongst 66 patients harbour at least one predicted pathogenic germline mutation in 10 cancer-associated genes including ATM, BRCA2, ERCC4, FANCC, FANCE, FANCI, MSH6, POLE, SDHA and TP53. The most frequently affected genes are involved in the DNA damage repair pathway, with a germline mutation prevalence of 10.6%. Our findings suggests that genetic predisposition plays a larger role than expected in our Asian cohort of sporadic sarcoma, therefore clinicians should be aware of the possibility that young sarcoma patients may be carriers of inherited mutations in cancer genes and should be considered for genetic testing, regardless of family history. The prevalence of germline mutations in DNA damage repair genes imply that therapeutic strategies exploiting the vulnerabilities resulting from impaired DNA repair may be promising areas for translational research.

30553462
New insights into the performance of multigene panel testing: Two novel nonsense variants in BRIP1 and TP53 in a young woman with breast cancer
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is an autosomal-dominant disorder caused by germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene TP53. Here we report the case of a family whose index case was a woman diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer at the age of 18 and who had a non-informative result after BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing. After extending the study through multigene panel testing, two clinically relevant variants in the TP53 and BRIP1 genes, respectively, were found. Afterwards, the patient developed a glioblastoma. Both tumours were consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Thanks to the possibility of studying different genes related with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, it was possible to find out the gene variant that caused the early onset cancers in the patient. Furthermore, genetic counselling was provided to the index case and her family.

23612572
Germline copy number variation of genes involved in chromatin remodelling in families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome with brain tumours
Germline alterations of the tumour suppressor TP53 gene are detected approximately in 25% of the families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), characterised by a genetic predisposition to a wide tumour spectrum, including soft-tissue sarcomas, osteosarcomas, premenopausal breast cancers, brain tumours, adrenocortical tumours, plexus choroid tumours, leukaemia and lung cancer. The aim of this study was to determine the contribution of germline copy number variations (CNVs) to LFS in families without detectable TP53 mutation. Using a custom-designed high-resolution array CGH, we evaluated the presence of rare germline CNVs in 64 patients fulfilling the Chompret criteria for LFS, but without any detectable TP53 alteration. In 15 unrelated patients, we detected 20 new CNVs absent in 600 controls. Remarkably, in four patients who had developed each brain tumour, the detected CNV overlap the KDM1A, MTA3, TRRAP or SIRT3 genes encoding p53 partners involved in histone methylation or acetylation. Focused analysis of SIRT3 showed that the CNV encompassing SIRT3 leads to SIRT3 overexpression, and that in vitro SIRT3 overexpression prevents apoptosis, increases G2/M and results in a hypermethylation of numerous genes. This study supports the causal role of germline alterations of genes involved in chromatin remodelling in genetic predisposition to cancer and, in particular, to brain tumours.

31815884
Germline MUTYH Mutation in a Pediatric Cancer Survivor Developing a Secondary Malignancy
Radiotherapy-induced second malignant neoplasms (SMNs) are a severe late complication in pediatric cancer survivors. Germline mutations in tumor suppressor genes contribute to SMNs; however, the most relevant germline variants mediating susceptibility are not fully defined. The authors performed matched whole-exome sequencing analyses of germline and tumor DNA from 4 pediatric solid tumor survivors who subsequently developed radiation-associated SMNs. Pathogenic and predicted deleterious germline variants were identified for each patient and validated with Sanger sequencing. These germline variants were compared with germline variants in a cohort of 59 pediatric patients diagnosed with primary sarcomas. Pathway analysis was performed to test for similarities in the germline variant profiles between individuals diagnosed with SMNs or primary sarcomas. One index patient was found to have a pathogenic germline monoallelic mutation in the MUTYH gene, which encodes the base excision repair enzyme adenine DNA glycosylase. This specific germline mutation is associated with a form of familial adenomatous polyposis, a new diagnosis in the patient. Germline-level genetic similarity exists between SMN-developing patients and patients developing primary sarcomas, with relevant genes involved in signal transduction and DNA repair mechanisms. The authors identify a germline MUTYH mutation in a pediatric cancer survivor developing an SMN. Germline mutations involving specific pathways such as base excision repair may identify individuals at risk for developing SMNs. The composition of germline variants in individual patients may enable estimates of patient-specific risk for developing SMNs. The authors anticipate that further analyses of germline genomes and epigenomes will reveal diverse genes and mechanisms influencing cancer risk.

25762628
TP53 intron 1 hotspot rearrangements are specific to sporadic osteosarcoma and can cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Somatic mutations of TP53 are among the most common in cancer and germline mutations of TP53 (usually missense) can cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). Recently, recurrent genomic rearrangements in intron 1 of TP53 have been described in osteosarcoma (OS), a highly malignant neoplasm of bone belonging to the spectrum of LFS tumors. Using whole-genome sequencing of OS, we found features of TP53 intron 1 rearrangements suggesting a unique mechanism correlated with transcription. Screening of 288 OS and 1,090 tumors of other types revealed evidence for TP53 rearrangements in 46 (16%) OS, while none were detected in other tumor types, indicating this rearrangement to be highly specific to OS. We revisited a four-generation LFS family where no TP53 mutation had been identified and found a 445 kb inversion spanning from the TP53 intron 1 towards the centromere. The inversion segregated with tumors in the LFS family. Cancers in this family had loss of heterozygosity, retaining the rearranged allele and resulting in TP53 expression loss. In conclusion, intron 1 rearrangements cause p53-driven malignancies by both germline and somatic mechanisms and provide an important mechanism of TP53 inactivation in LFS, which might in part explain the diagnostic gap of formerly classified "TP53 wild-type" LFS.

12584563
Screening for TP53 rearrangements in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome reveals a complete deletion of the TP53 gene
The absence of detectable germline TP53 mutations in a fraction of families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) has suggested the involvement of other genes, but this hypothesis remains controversial. The density of Alu repeats within the TP53 gene led us to search genomic rearrangements of TP53 in families without detectable TP53 mutation. To this aim, we adapted the quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) method to the analysis of the 11 exons of TP53. We analysed 98 families, either fulfilling (six families) or partially meeting (92 families) the criteria for LFS, and in which classical methods had failed to reveal TP53 alterations. We identified, in a large family fulfilling the criteria for LFS, a complete heterozygous deletion of TP53. Additional QMPSF analyses indicated that this deletion, which partially removed the centromeric FLJ10385 locus, covered approximately 45 kb. This deletion was shown to result from a complex rearrangement involving two distinct Alu-mediated recombinations. We conclude that TP53 germline rearrangements occur as rare events, but must be considered in LFS families without detectable point TP53 mutation.

27285993
Next-generation sequencing reveals germline mutations in an infant with synchronous occurrence of nephro- and neuroblastoma
Although neuro- and nephroblastoma are common solid tumors in children, the simultaneous occurrence is very rare and is often associated with syndromes. Here, we present a unique case of synchronous occurrence of neuro- and nephroblastoma in an infant with no signs of congenital anomalies or a syndrome. We performed genetic testing for possible candidate genes as underlying mutation using the next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach to target 94 genes and 284 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) involved in cancer. We uncovered a novel heterozygous germline missense mutation p.F58L (c.172T→C) in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene and one novel heterozygous rearrangement Q418Hfs(*)11 (c.1254_1264delins TTACTTAGTACAAGAACTG) in the Fanconi anemia gene FANCD2 leading to a truncated protein. Besides, several SNPs associated with the occurrence of neuroblastoma and/or nephroblastoma or multiple primary tumors were identified. The next-generation sequencing approach might in the future be useful not only in understanding tumor etiology but also in recognizing new genetic markers and targets for future personalized therapy.

31263571
High frequency of pathogenic germline variants within homologous recombination repair in patients with advanced cancer
Genomic screening of cancer patients for predisposing variants is traditionally based on age at onset, family history and type of cancer. Whereas the clinical guidelines have proven efficient in identifying families exhibiting classical attributes of hereditary cancer, the frequency of patients with alternative presentations is unclear. We identified and characterized germline variants in 636 patients with advanced solid cancer using whole exome sequencing. Pathogenic and likely pathogenic germline variants among 168 genes associated with hereditary cancer were considered. These variants were identified in 17.8% of the patients and within a wide range of cancer types. In particular, patients with mesothelioma, ovarian cancer, cervical cancer, urothelial cancer, and cancer of unknown primary origin displayed high frequencies of pathogenic variants. Variants were predominantly found in DNA-repair pathways and about half were within genes involved in homologous recombination repair. Twenty-two BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline variants were identified in 12 different cancer types, of which 10 (45%) were not previously identified in these patients based on the current clinical guidelines. Loss of heterozygosity and somatic second hits were identified in several of the affected genes, supporting possible causality for cancer development. A potential treatment target based on the pathogenic germline variant could be suggested in 25 patients (4%). The study demonstrates a high frequency of pathogenic germline variants in the homologous recombination pathway in patients with advanced solid cancers. We infer that genetic screening in this group of patients may reveal high-risk families and identify patients with potential PARP inhibitor sensitive tumors.

31981491
Large-Scale Exome Sequencing Study Implicates Both Developmental and Functional Changes in the Neurobiology of Autism
We present the largest exome sequencing study of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to date (n = 35,584 total samples, 11,986 with ASD). Using an enhanced analytical framework to integrate de novo and case-control rare variation, we identify 102 risk genes at a false discovery rate of 0.1 or less. Of these genes, 49 show higher frequencies of disruptive de novo variants in individuals ascertained to have severe neurodevelopmental delay, whereas 53 show higher frequencies in individuals ascertained to have ASD; comparing ASD cases with mutations in these groups reveals phenotypic differences. Expressed early in brain development, most risk genes have roles in regulation of gene expression or neuronal communication (i.e., mutations effect neurodevelopmental and neurophysiological changes), and 13 fall within loci recurrently hit by copy number variants. In cells from the human cortex, expression of risk genes is enriched in excitatory and inhibitory neuronal lineages, consistent with multiple paths to an excitatory-inhibitory imbalance underlying ASD.

31958074
Identification of germline and somatic mutations in pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma using whole exome sequencing
Objectives:
        
      
      Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal malignancies worldwide. Pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma (PASC) is a rare histological type of pancreatic carcinoma with a poor prognosis. The median survival time after diagnosis is less than one year. It is believed that the pathogenesis of PASC is different from pancreatic adenocarcinoma. In this study, we tried to reveal the intrinsic gene mutations associated with PASC through whole exome sequencing.

32989326
Mutations disrupting neuritogenesis genes confer risk for cerebral palsy
In addition to commonly associated environmental factors, genomic factors may cause cerebral palsy. We performed whole-exome sequencing of 250 parent-offspring trios, and observed enrichment of damaging de novo mutations in cerebral palsy cases. Eight genes had multiple damaging de novo mutations; of these, two (TUBA1A and CTNNB1) met genome-wide significance. We identified two novel monogenic etiologies, FBXO31 and RHOB, and showed that the RHOB mutation enhances active-state Rho effector binding while the FBXO31 mutation diminishes cyclin D levels. Candidate cerebral palsy risk genes overlapped with neurodevelopmental disorder genes. Network analyses identified enrichment of Rho GTPase, extracellular matrix, focal adhesion and cytoskeleton pathways. Cerebral palsy risk genes in enriched pathways were shown to regulate neuromotor function in a Drosophila reverse genetics screen. We estimate that 14% of cases could be attributed to an excess of damaging de novo or recessive variants. These findings provide evidence for genetically mediated dysregulation of early neuronal connectivity in cerebral palsy.

18923524
Oncogenic mutations of ALK kinase in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma in advanced stages is one of the most intractable paediatric cancers, even with recent therapeutic advances. Neuroblastoma harbours a variety of genetic changes, including a high frequency of MYCN amplification, loss of heterozygosity at 1p36 and 11q, and gain of genetic material from 17q, all of which have been implicated in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma. However, the scarcity of reliable molecular targets has hampered the development of effective therapeutic agents targeting neuroblastoma. Here we show that the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), originally identified as a fusion kinase in a subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NPM-ALK) and more recently in adenocarcinoma of lung (EML4-ALK), is also a frequent target of genetic alteration in advanced neuroblastoma. According to our genome-wide scans of genetic lesions in 215 primary neuroblastoma samples using high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping microarrays, the ALK locus, centromeric to the MYCN locus, was identified as a recurrent target of copy number gain and gene amplification. Furthermore, DNA sequencing of ALK revealed eight novel missense mutations in 13 out of 215 (6.1%) fresh tumours and 8 out of 24 (33%) neuroblastoma-derived cell lines. All but one mutation in the primary samples (12 out of 13) were found in stages 3-4 of the disease and were harboured in the kinase domain. The mutated kinases were autophosphorylated and displayed increased kinase activity compared with the wild-type kinase. They were able to transform NIH3T3 fibroblasts as shown by their colony formation ability in soft agar and their capacity to form tumours in nude mice. Furthermore, we demonstrate that downregulation of ALK through RNA interference suppresses proliferation of neuroblastoma cells harbouring mutated ALK. We anticipate that our findings will provide new insights into the pathogenesis of advanced neuroblastoma and that ALK-specific kinase inhibitors might improve its clinical outcome.

18724359
Identification of ALK as a major familial neuroblastoma predisposition gene
Neuroblastoma is a childhood cancer that can be inherited, but the genetic aetiology is largely unknown. Here we show that germline mutations in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene explain most hereditary neuroblastomas, and that activating mutations can also be somatically acquired. We first identified a significant linkage signal at chromosome bands 2p23-24 using a whole-genome scan in neuroblastoma pedigrees. Resequencing of regional candidate genes identified three separate germline missense mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of ALK that segregated with the disease in eight separate families. Resequencing in 194 high-risk neuroblastoma samples showed somatically acquired mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain in 12.4% of samples. Nine of the ten mutations map to critical regions of the kinase domain and were predicted, with high probability, to be oncogenic drivers. Mutations resulted in constitutive phosphorylation, and targeted knockdown of ALK messenger RNA resulted in profound inhibition of growth in all cell lines harbouring mutant or amplified ALK, as well as in two out of six wild-type cell lines for ALK. Our results demonstrate that heritable mutations of ALK are the main cause of familial neuroblastoma, and that germline or acquired activation of this cell-surface kinase is a tractable therapeutic target for this lethal paediatric malignancy.

34426522
The genetic structure of the Turkish population reveals high levels of variation and admixture
The construction of population-based variomes has contributed substantially to our understanding of the genetic basis of human inherited disease. Here, we investigated the genetic structure of Turkey from 3,362 unrelated subjects whose whole exomes (n = 2,589) or whole genomes (n = 773) were sequenced to generate a Turkish (TR) Variome that should serve to facilitate disease gene discovery in Turkey. Consistent with the history of present-day Turkey as a crossroads between Europe and Asia, we found extensive admixture between Balkan, Caucasus, Middle Eastern, and European populations with a closer genetic relationship of the TR population to Europeans than hitherto appreciated. We determined that 50% of TR individuals had high inbreeding coefficients (≥0.0156) with runs of homozygosity longer than 4 Mb being found exclusively in the TR population when compared to 1000 Genomes Project populations. We also found that 28% of exome and 49% of genome variants in the very rare range (allele frequency < 0.005) are unique to the modern TR population. We annotated these variants based on their functional consequences to establish a TR Variome containing alleles of potential medical relevance, a repository of homozygous loss-of-function variants and a TR reference panel for genotype imputation using high-quality haplotypes, to facilitate genome-wide association studies. In addition to providing information on the genetic structure of the modern TR population, these data provide an invaluable resource for future studies to identify variants that are associated with specific phenotypes as well as establishing the phenotypic consequences of mutations in specific genes.

22071890
ALK germline mutations in patients with neuroblastoma: a rare and weakly penetrant syndrome
Neuroblastic tumours may occur in a predisposition context. Two main genes are involved: PHOX2B, observed in familial cases and frequently associated with other neurocristopathies (Ondine's and Hirschsprung's disease); and ALK, mostly in familial tumours. We have assessed the frequency of mutations of these two genes in patients with a presumable higher risk of predisposition. We sequenced both genes in 26 perinatal cases (prebirth and <1 month of age, among which 10 were multifocal), 16 multifocal postnatal (>1 month) cases, 3 pairs of affected relatives and 8 patients with multiple malignancies. The whole coding sequences of the two genes were analysed in tumour and/or constitutional DNAs. We found three ALK germline mutations, all in a context of multifocal tumours. Two mutations (T1151R and R1192P) were inherited and shared by several unaffected patients, thus illustrating an incomplete penetrance. Younger age at tumour onset did not seem to offer a relevant selection criterion for ALK analyses. Conversely, multifocal tumours might be the most to benefit from the genetic screening. Finally, no PHOX2B germline mutation was found in this series. In conclusion, ALK deleterious mutations are rare events in patients with a high probability of predisposition. Other predisposing genes remain to be discovered.

18923525
Activating mutations in ALK provide a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma, an embryonal tumour of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system, accounts for approximately 15% of all deaths due to childhood cancer. High-risk neuroblastomas are rapidly progressive; even with intensive myeloablative chemotherapy, relapse is common and almost uniformly fatal. Here we report the detection of previously unknown mutations in the ALK gene, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, in 8% of primary neuroblastomas. Five non-synonymous sequence variations were identified in the kinase domain of ALK, of which three were somatic and two were germ line. The most frequent mutation, F1174L, was also identified in three different neuroblastoma cell lines. ALK complementary DNAs encoding the F1174L and R1275Q variants, but not the wild-type ALK cDNA, transformed interleukin-3-dependent murine haematopoietic Ba/F3 cells to cytokine-independent growth. Ba/F3 cells expressing these mutations were sensitive to the small-molecule inhibitor of ALK, TAE684 (ref. 4). Furthermore, two human neuroblastoma cell lines harbouring the F1174L mutation were also sensitive to the inhibitor. Cytotoxicity was associated with increased amounts of apoptosis as measured by TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL). Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of ALK expression in neuroblastoma cell lines with the F1174L mutation also resulted in apoptosis and impaired cell proliferation. Thus, activating alleles of the ALK receptor tyrosine kinase are present in primary neuroblastoma tumours and in established neuroblastoma cell lines, and confer sensitivity to ALK inhibition with small molecules, providing a molecular rationale for targeted therapy of this disease.

27733777
Germline activating TYK2 mutations in pediatric patients with two primary acute lymphoblastic leukemia occurrences
The contribution of genetic predisposing factors to the development of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the most frequently diagnosed cancer in childhood, has not been fully elucidated. Children presenting with multiple de novo leukemias are more likely to suffer from genetic predisposition. Here, we selected five of these patients and analyzed the mutational spectrum of normal and malignant tissues. In two patients, we identified germline mutations in TYK2, a member of the JAK tyrosine kinase family. These mutations were located in two adjacent codons of the pseudokinase domain (p.Pro760Leu and p.Gly761Val). In silico modeling revealed that both mutations affect the conformation of this autoregulatory domain. Consistent with this notion, both germline mutations promote TYK2 autophosphorylation and activate downstream STAT family members, which could be blocked with the JAK kinase inhibitor I. These data indicate that germline activating TYK2 mutations predispose to the development of ALL.

33523537
Crizotinib response in a neuroblastoma patient with a constitutional mosaic anaplastic lymphoma kinase I1170N-activating mutation


21972109
Germline gain-of-function mutations of ALK disrupt central nervous system development
Neuroblastoma (NB) is a frequent embryonal tumor of sympathetic ganglia and adrenals with extremely variable outcome. Recently, somatic amplification and gain-of-function mutations of the anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) gene, either somatic or germline, were identified in a significant proportion of NB cases. Here we report a novel syndromic presentation associating congenital NB with severe encephalopathy and abnormal shape of the brainstem on brain MRI in two unrelated sporadic cases harboring de novo, germline, heterozygous ALK gene mutations. Both mutations are gain-of-function mutations that have been reported in NB and NB cell lines. These observations further illustrate the role of oncogenes in both tumour predisposition and normal development, and shed light on the pleiotropic and activity-dependent role of ALK in humans. More generally, missing germline mutations relative to the spectrum of somatic mutations reported for a given oncogene may be a reflection of severe effects during embryonic development, and may prompt mutation screening in patients with extreme phenotypes.

18923523
Somatic and germline activating mutations of the ALK kinase receptor in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma, a tumour derived from the peripheral sympathetic nervous system, is one of the most frequent solid tumours in childhood. It usually occurs sporadically but familial cases are observed, with a subset of cases occurring in association with congenital malformations of the neural crest being linked to germline mutations of the PHOX2B gene. Here we conducted genome-wide comparative genomic hybridization analysis on a large series of neuroblastomas. Copy number increase at the locus encoding the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase receptor was observed recurrently. One particularly informative case presented a high-level gene amplification that was strictly limited to ALK, indicating that this gene may contribute on its own to neuroblastoma development. Through subsequent direct sequencing of cell lines and primary tumour DNAs we identified somatic mutations of the ALK kinase domain that mainly clustered in two hotspots. Germline mutations were observed in two neuroblastoma families, indicating that ALK is a neuroblastoma predisposition gene. Mutated ALK proteins were overexpressed, hyperphosphorylated and showed constitutive kinase activity. The knockdown of ALK expression in ALK-mutated cells, but also in cell lines overexpressing a wild-type ALK, led to a marked decrease of cell proliferation. Altogether, these data identify ALK as a critical player in neuroblastoma development that may hence represent a very attractive therapeutic target in this disease that is still frequently fatal with current treatments.

27179218
Identification of a novel inherited ALK variant M1199L in the WNT type of medulloblastoma
Rearrangements involving the ALK gene were identified in a variety of cancers, including paediatric tumour neuroblastoma where presence of ALK expression is also associated with adverse prognosis. Microarrays data indicate that ALK is expressed in another paediatric tumour - medulloblastoma. Therefore, we investigated if the ALK gene is mutated in medulloblastoma and performed simultaneously the molecular profiling of tumours. Tumours from sixty-four medulloblastoma patients were studied for detection of ALK alterations in exons 23 and 25 using Sanger method. The molecular subtypes of tumours were identified by detection of mutations in the CTNNB1 gene, monosomy 6 and by immunohistochemistry using a panel of representative antibodies. Among three ALK variants detected two resulted in intron variants (rs3738867, rs113866835) and the third one was a novel heterozygous variant c.3595A>T in exon 23 identified in the WNT type of tumour. It resulted in methionine to leucine substitution at codon position 1199 (M1199L) of the kinase domain of ALK protein. Results of analysis using three in silico algorithms confirmed the pathogenicity of this single nucleotide variation. The same gene alteration was detected in both patient and maternal peripheral blood leukocytes indicating an inherited type of the detected variant. Presence of ALK expression in tumour tissue was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The tumour was diagnosed as classic medulloblastoma, however with visible areas of focal anaplastic features. The patient has been disease free for 6 years since diagnosis. This is the first evidence of an inherited ALK variant in the WNT type of medulloblastoma, what altogether with presence of ALK expression may point towards involvement of the ALK gene in this type of tumours.

30716324
Prevalence of Germline Mutations Associated With Cancer Risk in Patients With Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms
Background & aims:
        
      
      Many patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma carry germline mutations associated with increased risk of cancer. It is not clear whether patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), which are precursors to some pancreatic cancers, also carry these mutations. We assessed the prevalence of germline mutations associated with cancer risk in patients with histologically confirmed IPMN.

21804922
The neuroblastoma ALK(I1250T) mutation is a kinase-dead RTK in vitro and in vivo
Activating mutations in the kinase domain of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) have recently been shown to be an important determinant in the genetics of the childhood tumor neuroblastoma. Here we discuss an in-depth analysis of one of the reported gain-of-function ALK mutations-ALK(I1250T)-identified in the germ line DNA of one patient. Our analyses were performed in cell culture-based systems and subsequently confirmed in a Drosophila model. The results presented here indicate that the germ line ALK(I1250T) mutation is most probably not a determinant for tumor initiation or progression and, in contrast, seems to generate a kinase-dead mutation in the ALK receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). Consistent with this, stimulation with agonist ALK antibodies fails to lead to stimulation of ALK(I1250T) and we were unable to detect tyrosine phosphorylation under any circumstances. In agreement, ALK(I1250T) is unable to activate downstream signaling pathways or to mediate neurite outgrowth, in contrast to the activated wild-type ALK receptor or the activating ALK(F1174S) mutant. Identical results were obtained when the ALK(I1250T) mutant was expressed in a Drosophila model, confirming the lack of activity of this mutant ALK RTK. We suggest that the ALK(I1250T) mutation leads to a kinase-dead ALK RTK, in stark contrast to assumed gain-of-function status, with significant implications for patients reported to carry this particular ALK mutation.

23334666
The genetic landscape of high-risk neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of the developing sympathetic nervous system that often presents with widespread metastatic disease, resulting in survival rates of less than 50%. To determine the spectrum of somatic mutation in high-risk neuroblastoma, we studied 240 affected individuals (cases) using a combination of whole-exome, genome and transcriptome sequencing as part of the Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) initiative. Here we report a low median exonic mutation frequency of 0.60 per Mb (0.48 nonsilent) and notably few recurrently mutated genes in these tumors. Genes with significant somatic mutation frequencies included ALK (9.2% of cases), PTPN11 (2.9%), ATRX (2.5%, and an additional 7.1% had focal deletions), MYCN (1.7%, causing a recurrent p.Pro44Leu alteration) and NRAS (0.83%). Rare, potentially pathogenic germline variants were significantly enriched in ALK, CHEK2, PINK1 and BARD1. The relative paucity of recurrent somatic mutations in neuroblastoma challenges current therapeutic strategies that rely on frequently altered oncogenic drivers.

28202063
Next-generation sequencing in familial breast cancer patients from Lebanon
Background:
        
      
      Familial breast cancer (BC) represents 5 to 10% of all BC cases. Mutations in two high susceptibility BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes explain 16-40% of familial BC, while other high, moderate and low susceptibility genes explain up to 20% more of BC families. The Lebanese reported prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 deleterious mutations (5.6% and 12.5%) were lower than those reported in the literature.

28125075
Assigning clinical meaning to somatic and germ-line whole-exome sequencing data in a prospective cancer precision medicine study
Purpose:
        
      
      Implementing cancer precision medicine in the clinic requires assessing the therapeutic relevance of genomic alterations. A main challenge is the systematic interpretation of whole-exome sequencing (WES) data for clinical care.

32368696
Systems Analysis Implicates WAVE2 Complex in the Pathogenesis of Developmental Left-Sided Obstructive Heart Defects
Genetic variants are the primary driver of congenital heart disease (CHD) pathogenesis. However, our ability to identify causative variants is limited. To identify causal CHD genes that are associated with specific molecular functions, the study used prior knowledge to filter de novo variants from 2,881 probands with sporadic severe CHD. This approach enabled the authors to identify an association between left ventricular outflow tract obstruction lesions and genes associated with the WAVE2 complex and regulation of small GTPase-mediated signal transduction. Using CRISPR zebrafish knockdowns, the study confirmed that WAVE2 complex proteins brk1, nckap1, and wasf2 and the regulators of small GTPase signaling cul3a and racgap1 are critical to cardiac development.

22810114
Identification of ALK germline mutation (3605delG) in pediatric anaplastic medulloblastoma
The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene has been found either rearranged or mutated in several neoplasms such as anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, non-small-cell lung cancer, neuroblastoma and anaplastic thyroid cancer. Medulloblastoma (MB) is an embryonic pediatric cancer arising from nervous system, a tissue in which ALK is expressed during embryonic development. We performed an ALK mutation screening in 52 MBs and we found a novel heterozygous germline deletion of a single base in exon 23 (3605delG) in a case with marked anaplasia. This G deletion results in a frameshift mutation producing a premature stop codon in exon 25 of ALK tyrosine kinase domain. We also screened three human MB cell lines without finding any mutation of ALK gene. Quantitative expression analysis of 16 out of 52 samples showed overexpression of ALK mRNA in three MBs. In the present study, we report the first mutation of ALK found in MB. Moreover, a deletion of ALK gene producing a stop codon has not been detected in human tumors up to now. Further investigations are now required to elucidate whether the truncated form of ALK may have a role in signal transduction.

33372952
Germline Cancer Predisposition Variants in Pediatric Rhabdomyosarcoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group
Background:
        
      
      Several cancer-susceptibility syndromes are reported to underlie pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS); however, to our knowledge there have been no systematic efforts to characterize the heterogeneous genetic etiologies of this often-fatal malignancy.

28505269
New mutations in non-syndromic primary ovarian insufficiency patients identified via whole-exome sequencing
Study question:
        
      
      Is it possible to identify new mutations potentially associated with non-syndromic primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) via whole-exome sequencing (WES)?

19430803
A novel KIT missense mutation in one Chinese family with piebaldism
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital leukoderma, mostly affecting forehead, abdomen and knee. Previous studies have revealed that piebaldism is caused by mutations of the KIT gene, which encodes the cell surface transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor for KIT ligand. We reported here a Chinese Han family with piebaldism, and performed mutation detection of KIT gene by direct sequencing. A novel missense mutation C58G was identified in the patients, but not in the healthy individuals from the family and 100 unrelated controls. This study contributes to the database on KIT in piebaldism and enriches the knowledge about the genotype/phenotype correlation.

8875953
Mutations in the ligand-binding domain of the kit receptor: an uncommon site in human piebaldism
Heterozygous mutations in the gene for the Kit transmembrane receptor have been identified recently in human piebaldism and mouse "dominant spotting." Interestingly, all of the 14 known missense mutations that cause depigmentation in these species map to the tyrosine kinase domain of the receptor, whereas none have involved the extracellular ligand-binding domain. In an attempt to detect these uncommon mutations, we screened the nine exons encoding the extracellular portion of Kit for single-strand conformation polymorphisms (SSCP) in eight piebald subjects previously reported to be negative for kinase mutations. Four of these eight kindreds proved to carry novel mutations. The first mutation, found in two apparently unrelated probands with mild piebaldism and English ancestry, substitutes an arginine for a highly conserved cysteine at codon 136. This substitution disrupts a putative disulfide bond required for formation of the second Ig-like (D2) loop of the Kit ligand-binding domain. The second mutation, detected in a piebald kindred characterized by unusually limited depigmentation, substitutes a threonine for an alanine at codon 178, a site just proximal to conserved cysteines at codons 183 and 186. The third mutation, occurring in a kindred with more extensive depigmentation, is a novel four-base insertion in exon 2 that results in a proximal frameshift and premature termination. The data strongly suggest that piebaldism can result from missense mutations in the Kit ligand-binding domain, although the resulting phenotype may be milder than that observed for null or kinase mutations. The apparent clustering of these uncommon mutations at or near the conserved cysteines for the D2 Ig-like loop further suggests a critical role for this region in Kit receptor function.

20981092
A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing
The 1000 Genomes Project aims to provide a deep characterization of human genome sequence variation as a foundation for investigating the relationship between genotype and phenotype. Here we present results of the pilot phase of the project, designed to develop and compare different strategies for genome-wide sequencing with high-throughput platforms. We undertook three projects: low-coverage whole-genome sequencing of 179 individuals from four populations; high-coverage sequencing of two mother-father-child trios; and exon-targeted sequencing of 697 individuals from seven populations. We describe the location, allele frequency and local haplotype structure of approximately 15 million single nucleotide polymorphisms, 1 million short insertions and deletions, and 20,000 structural variants, most of which were previously undescribed. We show that, because we have catalogued the vast majority of common variation, over 95% of the currently accessible variants found in any individual are present in this data set. On average, each person is found to carry approximately 250 to 300 loss-of-function variants in annotated genes and 50 to 100 variants previously implicated in inherited disorders. We demonstrate how these results can be used to inform association and functional studies. From the two trios, we directly estimate the rate of de novo germline base substitution mutations to be approximately 10(-8) per base pair per generation. We explore the data with regard to signatures of natural selection, and identify a marked reduction of genetic variation in the neighbourhood of genes, due to selection at linked sites. These methods and public data will support the next phase of human genetic research.

22995991
An informatics approach to analyzing the incidentalome
Purpose:
        
      
      Next-generation sequencing has transformed genetic research and is poised to revolutionize clinical diagnosis. However, the vast amount of data and inevitable discovery of incidental findings require novel analytic approaches. We therefore implemented for the first time a strategy that utilizes an a priori structured framework and a conservative threshold for selecting clinically relevant incidental findings.

7529964
Novel mutations and deletions of the KIT (steel factor receptor) gene in human piebaldism
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder of pigmentation characterized by white patches of skin and hair. Melanocytes are lacking in these hypopigmented regions, the result of mutations of the KIT gene, which encodes the cell surface receptor for steel factor (SLF). We describe the analysis of 26 unrelated patients with piebaldism-like hypopigmentation--17 typical patients, 5 with atypical clinical features or family histories, and 4 with other disorders that involve white spotting. We identified novel pathologic mutations or deletions of the KIT gene in 10 (59%) of the typical patients, and in 2 (40%) of the atypical patients. Overall, we have identified pathologic KIT gene mutations in 21 (75%) of 28 unrelated patients with typical piebaldism we have studied. Of the patients without apparent KIT mutations, none have apparent abnormalities of the gene encoding SLF itself (MGF), and genetic linkage analyses in two of these families are suggestive of linkage of the piebald phenotype to KIT. Thus, most patients with typical piebaldism appear to have abnormalities of the KIT gene.

15737214
Analysis of KIT, SCF, and initial screening of SLUG in patients with piebaldism


12204004
Human piebaldism: six novel mutations of the proto-oncogene KIT
Human piebaldism is a rare autosomal dominant disorder that comprises congenital patchy depigmentation of the scalp, forehead, trunk and limbs. It is caused by mutations in the cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase gene (KIT, also c-kit). We screened three families and three isolated cases of piebaldism from different countries for mutations in the KIT gene using automated sequencing methods. We report six novel KIT point mutations: three missense (C788R, W835R, P869S) at highly conserved amino acid sites; one nonsense (Q347X) that results in termination of translation of the KIT gene in exon 6; and two splice site nucleotide substitutions (IVS13+2T>G, IVS17-1G>A) that are predicted to impair normal splicing. These mutations were not detected in over 100 normal individuals and are likely to be the cause of piebaldism in our subjects.

33155701
Report of two Japanese patients with piebaldism including a novel mutation in KIT


24289326
A new germline mutation in KIT associated with diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis in a Chinese family
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM) is an extremely rare disease characterized by massive proliferation of mast cells infiltrating the entire skin. We report a Chinese family with indolent DCM, and detection of a new germline KIT mutation located in the fifth immunoglobulin-like loop of the KIT protein, which probably results in a gain-of-function effect and consequent overactivation of mast cells. Our report expands the knowledge of correlations between the genotype of KIT mutations and the phenotype of DCM.

16183119
A novel K509I mutation of KIT identified in familial mastocytosis-in vitro and in vivo responsiveness to imatinib therapy
KIT mutation has been implicated in sporadic mastocytosis, yet clusters in only a few sites in the molecule. For those malignancies associated with KIT mutation or over-expression, imatinib offers a specific therapeutic option, yet it has no effect on D816V mutation commonly seen in sporadic mastocytosis. The majority of cases of familial mastocytosis seem to lack KIT mutation. We report a kindred with mastocytosis in whom in vitro and in vivo sensitivity to imatinib was demonstrated. Mutation analysis of the KIT coding region in this family identified a novel A>T mutation at nucleotide 1547 [K509I] in exon 9 in both of the affected patients.

23610110
Rare, germline mutation of KIT with imatinib-resistant multiple GI stromal tumors and mastocytosis


24582309
Mastocytosis associated with a rare germline KIT K509I mutation displays a well-differentiated mast cell phenotype
Background:
        
      
      Mastocytosis associated with germline KIT activating mutations is exceedingly rare. We report the unique clinicopathologic features of a patient with systemic mastocytosis caused by a de novo germline KIT K509I mutation.

15070706
A novel form of mastocytosis associated with a transmembrane c-kit mutation and response to imatinib
Mutational analysis of the c-kit gene in a patient with a previously undescribed variant of mast cell disease revealed a germline mutation, Phe522Cys, within the transmembrane portion of the Kit receptor protein. Transfection experiments revealed that the mutation caused ligand-independent autophosphorylation of Kit, which was inhibited by the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate. The patient's bone marrow biopsy and aspirate displayed unique pathologic features with the presence of excessive numbers of mature-appearing mast cells and absence of aberrant mast cell surface expression of CD2, CD25, and CD35. Therapy with imatinib mesylate resulted in a dramatic improvement in mast cell burden and clinical symptoms. These results highlight the significance of the transmembrane region of Kit in activation of the molecule and its importance in mast cell development and suggest a role for screening for transmembrane c-kit mutations in patients with mastocytosis in association with the decision to use imatinib mesylate.

27258816
Struma Ovarii With Malignant Transformation and Germline KIT Mutation: A Case Report With Review of the Literature
Struma ovarii accounts for 5% of ovarian teratomas. Malignant transformation occurs in <0.3%, however, the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. We report a patient with follicular variant and tall cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) arising from struma ovarii and coexisting incidental PTC in the thyroid. Mutation analysis by next-generation sequencing identified a novel germline mutation, KIT p.V530I mutation in the tumors and normal ovarian and thyroid tissue. Immunohistochemical staining showed loss of KIT expression in the PTCs. Activating mutations in KIT play an important role in diagnosis and prognosis of multiple malignancies including mastocytosis, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, and a subset of melanoma and acute myeloid leukemia. The p.V530I mutation has only been reported in 3 previous cases: acute myeloid leukemia, aggressive fibromatosis, and adenocarcinoma of the colon. In the case of aggressive fibromatosis, the patient responded well to imatinib treatment. KIT mutations have never been reported in thyroid carcinomas. This is the first case of PTC-harboring KIT mutation. Although more work needs to be done to elucidate the significance of this germline mutation, the response of the fibromatosis patient to imatinib may shed light on targeted therapy in PTC harboring this mutation.

16081693
Extracellular KIT receptor mutants, commonly found in core binding factor AML, are constitutively active and respond to imatinib mesylate
Multiple genetic alterations are required to induce acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Mutations in the extracellular domain of the KIT receptor are almost exclusively found in patients with AML carrying translocations or inversions affecting members of the core binding factor (CBF) gene family and correlate with a high risk of relapse. We demonstrate that these complex insertion and deletion mutations lead to constitutive activation of the KIT receptor, which induces factor-independent growth of interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent cells. Mutation of the evolutionary conserved amino acid D419 within the extracellular domain was sufficient to constitutively activate the KIT receptor, although high expression levels were required. Dose-dependent growth inhibition and apoptosis were observed using either the protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate (STI571, Gleevec) or by blocking the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT pathway. Our data show that the addition of kinase inhibitors to conventional chemotherapy might be a new therapeutic option for CBF-AML expressing mutant KIT.

15173254
A germline mutation in KIT in familial diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis


18795925
Association of paediatric mastocytosis with a polymorphism resulting in an amino acid substitution (M541L) in the transmembrane domain of c-KIT
Background:
        
      
      The receptor tyrosine kinase c-KIT plays a key role in normal mast cell development. Point mutations in c-KIT have been associated with sporadic or familial mastocytosis.

22703879
Secondary variants in individuals undergoing exome sequencing: screening of 572 individuals identifies high-penetrance mutations in cancer-susceptibility genes
Genome- and exome-sequencing costs are continuing to fall, and many individuals are undergoing these assessments as research participants and patients. The issue of secondary (so-called incidental) findings in exome analysis is controversial, and data are needed on methods of detection and their frequency. We piloted secondary variant detection by analyzing exomes for mutations in cancer-susceptibility syndromes in subjects ascertained for atherosclerosis phenotypes. We performed exome sequencing on 572 ClinSeq participants, and in 37 genes, we interpreted variants that cause high-penetrance cancer syndromes by using an algorithm that filtered results on the basis of mutation type, quality, and frequency and that filtered mutation-database entries on the basis of defined categories of causation. We identified 454 sequence variants that differed from the human reference. Exclusions were made on the basis of sequence quality (26 variants) and high frequency in the cohort (77 variants) or dbSNP (17 variants), leaving 334 variants of potential clinical importance. These were further filtered on the basis of curation of literature reports. Seven participants, four of whom were of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and three of whom did not meet family-history-based referral criteria, had deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. One participant had a deleterious SDHC mutation, which causes paragangliomas. Exome sequencing, coupled with multidisciplinary interpretation, detected clinically important mutations in cancer-susceptibility genes; four of such mutations were in individuals without a significant family history of disease. We conclude that secondary variants of high clinical importance will be detected at an appreciable frequency in exomes, and we suggest that priority be given to the development of more efficient modes of interpretation with trials in larger patient groups.

17124503
Piebald trait: implication of kit mutation on in vitro melanocyte survival and on the clinical application of cultured epidermal autografts
Piebald trait leukoderma results from "loss-of-function" mutations in the kit gene. Correlations between mutation type and clinical phenotype have been reported. However, mutation classification has been mainly based on the clinical features of patients. The aim of this study was to get a better understanding of the pathogenesis of human piebaldism by establishing whether the kit mutation type may affect the in vitro survival/proliferation of patient melanocytes. Overall, the research was finalized to implement the clinical application of the autologous cultured epidermis in the treatment of piebald patients. Seven patients, who were transplanted with autologous in vitro reconstituted epidermis, showed an average percentage of repigmentation of 90.7. Six novel and one previously reported mutations were found and their postulated effects discussed in relation to the clinical phenotype and in vitro behavior of epidermal cells. Although mutation type did not impair repigmentation given by autotransplantation, it was shown to influence the survival/proliferation of co-cultured melanocytes and keratinocytes. In particular, tyrosine kinase domain mutations were found with melanocyte loss and keratinocyte senescence during expansion of epidermal cultures. Results indicate that the clinical application of cultured epidermis in piebald patients may be optimized by investigating mutation functional effects before planning surgical operations.

22083669
Characterization of novel germline c-kit gene mutation, KIT-Tyr553Cys, observed in a family with multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors
We found a novel type germline mutation at exon 11 of the c-kit gene, which results in a substitution of Tyr to Cys at codon 553 of the c-kit gene product (KIT-Tyr553Cys), in a 68-year-old female patient with multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). In the present study, we carried out mutational analysis in her family members to determine the carriers and characterized the mutation by introducing the corresponding mutation (murine KIT-Tyr552Cys) into expression vector possessing murine c-kit cDNA. Mutational analysis of peripheral blood leukocytes of her family members revealed that a 44-year-old son had the same mutation, but at present he had neither apparent symptoms nor images of multiple GISTs. By transfection with the expression vector possessing the murine mutant c-kit cDNA, interleukin-3-dependent Ba/F3 murine lymphoid cells started growing autonomously without any growth factors, indicating that the mutation was considered to be of gain-of-function. Imatinib, a small molecule of tyrosine kinase inhibitor, effectively inhibited autophosphorylation of KIT-Tyr552Cys. Nilotinib, another small molecule of the KIT inhibitor, also effectively inhibited autophosphorylation of KIT-Tyr552Cys. In fact, proliferation of Ba/F3 cells expressing KIT-Tyr552Cys was effectively inhibited by both imatinib and nilotinib. These findings indicate that the novel type human KIT-Tyr553Cys mutation is the cause of the present familial and multiple GISTs, and that both imatinib and nilotinib might effectively inhibit the growth of GISTs developing in the patients of this family.

10680913
Cause of familial and multiple gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumors with hyperplasia of interstitial cells of Cajal is germline mutation of the c-kit gene


28710566
Remarkable effects of imatinib in a family with young onset gastrointestinal stromal tumors and cutaneous hyperpigmentation associated with a germline KIT-Trp557Arg mutation: case report and literature overview
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) occur mostly sporadically. GISTs associated with a familial syndrome are very rare and are mostly wild type for KIT and platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFRA). To date 35 kindreds and 8 individuals have been described with GISTs associated with germline KIT mutations. This is the third family described with a germline p.Trp557Arg mutation in exon 11 of the KIT gene. The effect of imatinib in patients harboring a germline KIT mutation has been rarely described. Moreover, in some studies imatinib treatment was withheld considering the lack of evidence for efficacy of this treatment in GIST patients harboring a germline KIT mutation. This paper describes a 52-year old patient with a de novo germline p.Trp557Arg mutation with multiple GISTs throughout the gastrointestinal tract and cutaneous hyperpigmentation. Imatinib treatment showed long-term regression of the GISTs and evident pathological response was seen after resection. Remarkably, the hyperpigmentation of the skin also diminished during imatinib treatment. Genetic screening of the family revealed the same mutation in two daughters, both with similar cutaneous hyperpigmentation. One daughter, aged 23, was diagnosed with multiple small intestine GISTs, which were resected. She was treated with adjuvant imatinib which prompted rapid regression of the cutaneous hyperpigmentation. Imatinib treatment in GIST patients harboring a germline KIT mutation shows favorable and long-term responses in both the tumor and the phenotypical hyperpigmentation.

11208730
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor with hyperpigmentation: association with a germline mutation of the c-kit gene
We describe 2 siblings with multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) and cutaneous hyperpigmentation. Both had a point mutation of the c-kit gene. The patients were sisters who had exhibited cutaneous hyperpigmentation since their late teens, but the diagnosis of multiple gastrointestinal submucosal tumors was not made until they were 41 and 45 years old. Histologic examination showed that these tumors were GISTs expressing CD34 and Kit protein. Both patients died of GISTs. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis showed a mutation of c-kit in tumor DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded specimens. Direct sequencing analysis showed that the point mutation occurred at codon 559 of exon 11 (Val-->Ala). The same single-point mutation was detected in DNA extracted from peripheral leukocytes obtained from the younger sister and her 2 children (who had similar general hyperpigmentation) as well as in DNA from a skin biopsy specimen taken from the older sister. The germline mutation at codon 559 of the c-kit gene found in the present familial GISTs differed from that in a previously reported case of familial GISTs. We propose that GISTs caused by a germline mutation of the c-kit gene should be referred to as GIST-cutaneous hyperpigmentation disease.

11505412
Germline mutation in the juxtamembrane domain of the kit gene in a family with gastrointestinal stromal tumors and urticaria pigmentosa
Background:
        
      
      Gain-of-function mutations of the c-kit protooncogene, mainly clustered in the juxtamembrane domain, have been reported in a significant fraction of gastrointestinal (GI) stromal tumors (GISTs) that represent the most common mesenchymal tumor of the GI tract. Two families also have been described with a GIST predisposition syndrome with a germline c-kit mutation affecting either the juxtamembrane domain or the tyrosine kinase domain. Here, the authors report on a family in which the dominantly inherited trait of hyperpigmented spots was inherited from an individual who developed multiple GISTs with diffuse hyperplasia of the myenteric plexus by his son, who was affected with urticaria pigmentosa.

15837988
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor syndrome: phenotypic and molecular features in a kindred
Purpose:
        
      
      Members of a family with hereditary gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) and a germline KIT oncogene mutation were evaluated for other potential syndrome manifestations. A tumor from the proband was analyzed to compare features with sporadic GISTs.

17255767
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors: Clinicopathologic and genetic analysis of 12 patients
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are extremely rare and usually associated with type 1 neurofibromatosis and familial GIST. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical, phenotypic, and genetic characteristics of multiple GISTs to gain insights into their underlying pathogenesis and clinical behavior. Forty-seven paraffin blocks of multiple GISTs from 12 patients were analyzed. Genomic DNA was extracted from the tumor and normal mucosa and mutations for 4 exons of KIT gene and 3 exons of PDGFRA gene were determined. Among 12 patients with multiple GISTs, 5 were sporadic, 2 were familial with germline mutations of KIT gene, and 5 were associated with type 1 neurofibromatosis. All but 1 sporadic and familial multiple GISTs showed mutations of KIT gene shared by the same mutation on each GIST mass within a patient. But in 1 sporadic case, different types of KIT mutations were observed. Two familial multiple GIST cases showed diffuse involvement of the gastrointestinal tract with diffuse hyperplasia of interstitial cell of Cajal. Multiple GISTs associated with type 1 neurofibromatosis were located in the jejunum and harbored no mutations of KIT or PDGFRA. Different types of KIT gene mutation found in our case raise a possibility that recurrence of GISTs within a gastrointestinal tract may have a chance to be a rare occurrence of multiple primary GISTs instead of true recurrence. Multiple GISTs show unique clinical, phenotypic, and genotypic characteristics that are dependent on the particular underlying mechanisms, but the overall prognosis is favorable regardless of the numbers or phenotype of GISTs.

23598963
A novel germline KIT mutation (p.L576P) in a family presenting with juvenile onset of multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors, skin hyperpigmentations, and esophageal stenosis
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder. We report on a kindred in which 3 family members carry a germline mutation (c.1727T>C, p.L576P) in exon 11 of the KIT gene. This mutation was not reported so far in familial GISTs. Apart from multiple GISTs in 2 of the mutation carriers, all of them had multiple hyperpigmented skin macules and a history of achalasia-like stenosis of the esophagus in early childhood. In the index patient >100 tumors and a diffuse Cajal cell hyperplasia of the small bowel occurred. Sequencing of DNA extracted from tumor tissue of one of his GISTs revealed the KIT mutation in exon 11 (c.1727T>C). By array comparative genomic hybridization whole chromosomal gains 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, and 18 were detected. In addition, we could identify a gain on chromosome 4, spanning the KIT gene. Together with the family described here, 24 unrelated cases with proven germline mutations in KIT have been reported. In these families the diagnosis was established from the age of 30 years onwards. Because in 1 patient reported here the GIST was a coincidental finding at the age of 15 years, the tumors might occur at a very young age and remain unnoticed until they-either due to increasing size, ulceration, or malignant progression-become symptomatic. Therefore, we propose to start screening patients with known KIT mutations from a younger age.

27981619
Familial Progressive Hyperpigmentation, Cutaneous Mastocytosis, and Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor as Clinical Manifestations of Mutations in the c-KIT Receptor Gene
Background:
        
      
      Familial progressive hyperpigmentation (FPH) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the appearance of hyperpigmented patches on the skin from early infancy that increase in size and number with age.

27771813
A case of multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors caused by a germline KIT gene mutation (p.Leu576Pro)
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) caused by germline KIT gene mutations are an extremely rare autosomal dominant disorder. We report a case of a 21-year-old woman who presented to the emergency department with a 2-week history of asthenia, palpitations and upper gastrointestinal bleeding. After further clinical evaluation one gastric and two small bowel GISTs were diagnosed, which were surgically resected after neoadjuvant therapy with Imatinib. Diffuse hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Cajal was also seen in the background gastric and small intestinal walls. Somatic mutational analysis of the KIT gene revealed a substitution at codon 576 in exon 11 (p.Leu576Pro) in all tumors and normal ileal mucosa. The germline nature of this mutation was confirmed by mutation analysis in peripheral blood leukocytes. However, she had no familial history of GISTs and her parents did not carry the respective germline mutation.

25176472
Novel mutations of KIT gene in two Korean patients: variegated shades of phenotypes in tyrosine kinase 1 domain
Keywords:
        
      
      KIT; MC1R; Piebaldism; Tyrosine kinase.

24627108
Whole-exome sequencing in patients with inherited neuropathies: outcome and challenges
Inherited peripheral neuropathies (IPN) are one of the most frequent inherited causes of neurological disability characterized by considerable phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity. Based on clinical and electrophysiological properties, they can be subdivided into three main groups: HMSN, dHMN, and HSN. At present, more than 50 IPN genes have been identified. Still, many patients and families with IPN have not yet received a molecular genetic diagnosis because clinical genetic testing usually only covers a subset of IPN genes. Moreover, a considerable proportion of IPN genes has to be identified. Here we present results of WES in 27 IPN patients excluded for mutations in many known IPN genes. Eight of the patients received a definite diagnosis. While six of these patients carried bona fide pathogenic mutations in known IPN genes, two patients had mutations in genes known to be involved in other types of neuromuscular disorders. A further group of eight patients carried sequence variations in IPN genes that could not unequivocally be classified as pathogenic. In addition, combining data of WES and linkage analysis identified SH3BP4, ITPR3, and KLHL13 as novel IPN candidate genes. Moreover, there was evidence that particular mutations in PEX12, a gene known to cause Zellweger syndrome, could also lead to an IPN phenotype. We show that WES is a useful tool for diagnosing IPN and we suggest an expanded phenotypic spectrum of some genes involved in other neuromuscular and neurodegenerative disorders. Nevertheless, interpretation of variants in known and potential novel disease genes has remained challenging.

1376329
Human piebald trait resulting from a dominant negative mutant allele of the c-kit membrane receptor gene
Human piebald trait is an autosomal dominant defect in melanocyte development characterized by patches of hypopigmented skin and hair. Although the molecular basis of piebaldism has been unclear, a phenotypically similar "dominant spotting" of mice is caused by mutations in the murine c-kit protooncogene. In this regard, one piebald case with a point mutation and another with a deletion of c-kit have been reported, although a polymorphism or the involvement of a closely linked gene could not be excluded. To confirm the hypothesis that piebaldism results from mutations in the human gene, c-kit exons were amplified by polymerase chain reaction from the DNA of 10 affected subjects and screened for nucleotide changes by single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis. In one subject with a variant single-stranded conformation polymorphism pattern for the first exon encoding the kinase domain, DNA sequencing demonstrated a missense mutation (Glu583----Lys). This mutation is identical to the mouse W37 mutation which abolishes autophosphorylation of the protein product and causes more extensive depigmentation than "null" mutations. In accord with this "dominant negative" effect, the identical mutation in this human kindred is associated with unusually extensive depigmentation. Thus, the finding of a piebald subject with a mutation that impairs receptor activity strongly implicates the c-kit gene in the molecular pathogenesis of this human developmental defect.

20140688
Exploring the cause of drug resistance by the detrimental missense mutations in KIT receptor: computational approach
In this work, we computationally identified the most detrimental missense mutations of KIT receptor causing gastrointestinal stromal tumors and analyzed the drug resistance of these missense mutations. Out of 31 missense mutations, 19 variants were commonly found less stable, deleterious and damaging by I-Mutant 2.0, SIFT and PolyPhen programs, respectively. Subsequently, we performed modeling of these 19 variants to understand their change in conformations with respect to native KIT receptor by computing their RMSD. Further, the native and 19 mutants were docked with the drug 'Imatinib' to explain the drug resistance of these detrimental missense mutations. Among the 19 mutants, we found by docking studies that 12 mutants, namely, F584C, F584L, V654A, L656P, T670I, R804W, D816F, D816V, D816Y, N822K, Y823D and E839K had less binding affinity with Imatinib than the native type. Finally, we analyzed that the loss of binding affinity of these 12 mutants, was due to altered flexibility in their binding amino acids with Imatinib as compared with native type by normal mode analysis. In our work, we found the novel data that the majority of the drug-binding amino acids in those 12 mutants had encountered loss of flexibility, which could be the theoretical basis for the cause of drug insensitivity.

11074500
Three novel mutations of the proto-oncogene KIT cause human piebaldism


21680281
Two children with a mild or moderate piebaldism phenotype and a father without leukoderma in a family with the same recurrent missense mutation in the kinase domain of KIT


1370874
Dominant negative and loss of function mutations of the c-kit (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) proto-oncogene in human piebaldism
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant disorder of melanocyte development and is characterized by congenital white patches of skin and hair from which melanocytes are completely absent. A similar disorder of the mouse, "dominant white spotting" (W), results from mutations of the c-kit proto-oncogene, which encodes the cellular tyrosine kinase receptor for the mast/stem cell growth factor. We have identified c-kit gene mutations in three patients with piebaldism. A missense substitution (Phe----Leu) at codon 584, within the tyrosine kinase domain, is associated with a severe piebald phenotype, whereas two different frameshifts, within codons 561 and 642, are both associated with a variable and relatively mild piebald phenotype. This is consistent with a possible "dominant negative" effect of missense c-kit polypeptides on the function of the dimeric receptor.

21925843
Repigmentation of leukoderma in a piebald patient associated with a novel c-KIT gene mutation, G592E, of the tyrosine kinase domain


17107413
New mutations of KIT gene in two Chinese patients with piebaldism


16220461
[A novel KIT gene mutation results in piebaldism]
Objective:
        
      
      To detect gene mutation in proband and his mother from a family with piebaldism.

23786947
A novel mutation of the KIT gene in a Chinese family with piebaldism
Background:
        
      
      Human piebaldism is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by congenital white forelock and depigmented patches of skin, typically on the forehead, anterior trunk and extremities. Mutations in the KIT gene have been proposed to be responsible for the underlying changes in this disorder. The aim of this study was to identify gene mutation in a Chinese family with piebaldism.

31341943
A novel KIT mutation in a family with expanded syndrome of piebaldism
Keywords:
        
      
      DGP, dermatologic gene panel; KIT mutation; TK, tyrosine kinase; genodermatosis; heterochromia iridis; next-generation sequencing; piebaldism.

20137753
Piebaldism and neurofibromatosis type 1: family report
Piebaldism is a rare disorder present at birth and inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. It results from a mutation in the c-kit proto-oncogene and is associated with a defect in the migration and differentiation of melanoblasts from the neural crest. Clinical manifestations and phenotypic severity strongly correlates with the site of mutation within the KIT gene. Here we report a 3-year-old boy and his 33-year-old father with leukoderma and poliosis associated with clinical criteria for Neurofibromatosis type 1. Genetic study of both revealed a p.Gly610Asp mutation in the KIT gene. This familiar mutation has not yet been reported in the literature. There are rare reports of piebaldism in association with neurofibromatosis type I.

22136869
Letter: Misdiagnosis of "neurofibromatosis" in patients with piebaldism
Miminal diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) includes six or more café-au-lait macules plus axillary freckling. However, a recent report by Duarte et al claims co-occurrence of piebaldism and NF1 using this minimal criteria. We assert that this is not an accurate conclusion because both of these pigmentary findings occur frequently in typical cases of piebaldism.

20688482
A novel mutation in the kinase domain of KIT in an Indian family with a mild piebaldism phenotype


22264755
Molecular characterization of two novel KIT mutations in patients with piebaldism


11174389
A novel KIT mutation results in piebaldism with progressive depigmentation
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant disorder of melanocyte development characterized by white skin (leukoderma) and white hair (poliosis). In general, piebaldism has been distinguished from vitiligo by the presence of lesions from birth, the hyperpigmented macules of depigmented and normal skin, and the static course. We hypothesized that an 8-year-old girl and her mother who had unusual piebaldism of a progressive nature would have a novel mutation of the KIT gene, the gene that is altered in patients with piebaldism, or of the MITF (microphthalmia activating transcription factor) gene, which would be expected to cause type II Waardenburg syndrome, but is associated with a phenotype of progressive depigmentation in mice. Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood of affected and unaffected family members, and the KIT and MITF genes were sequenced. Genetic analysis of genomic DNA from both the mother and daughter with progressive piebaldism revealed a novel Val620Ala (1859T>C) mutation in the KIT gene, which was not detected in family members without progressive piebaldism or in 52 normal control individuals. This KIT mutation affects the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain and thus predicts a severe phenotype, as was the case in this family. Although other KIT mutations in the vicinity of codon 620 lead to the standard phenotype of static piebaldism, the Val620Ala mutation is novel and may result in a previously undescribed phenotype with melanocyte instability, leading to progressive loss of pigmentation as well as the progressive appearance of the hyperpigmented macules.

29896733
[Analysis of KIT mutations in five patients from two Han Chinese pedigrees affected with Piebaldism]
Objective:
        
      
      To screen for KIT gene mutations in two Han Chinese pedigrees affected with Piebaldism.

25243845
Novel R634W c-kit mutation identified in familial mastocytosis
Familial mastocytosis is a well-documented but rare entity, with fewer than 100 cases reported in the literature. The etiology has most commonly been linked to activating c-kit mutations, with several mutations reported to date. We present a novel familial mastocytosis-associated c-kit mutation (R634W) in three siblings with urticaria pigmentosa. This mutation has been previously described in mucosal melanoma, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and acute myeloid leukemia. Because this is a rare mutation, it is unclear whether screening for other disease states associated with the mutation would be of benefit.

23016555
Association of Piebaldism, multiple café-au-lait macules, and intertriginous freckling: clinical evidence of a common pathway between KIT and sprouty-related, ena/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein homology-1 domain containing protein 1 (SPRED1)
Piebaldism is a rare genodermatosis caused by KIT mutations. We report the case of a 5-year-old boy who had the white forelock and leukoderma of piebaldism, but the presence of many café-au-lait macules and axillary and inguinal freckling complicated the diagnosis. Patients with similar cutaneous findings have been previously reported, and their disorder has been attributed to an overlap of piebaldism and neurofibromatosis type 1. Legius syndrome is a recently described syndrome caused by Sprouty-related, Ena/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein homology-1 domain containing protein 1 (SPRED1) mutations that also has multiple café-au-lait macules and intertriginous freckling. Based on our current understanding of KIT and SPRED1 protein interactions, we propose that café-au-lait macules and freckling may be seen in some patients with piebaldism and does not necessarily represent coexistence of neurofibromatosis type 1.

11073817
Germline-activating mutation in the kinase domain of KIT gene in familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors
The proto-oncogene KIT encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT. Gain-of-function mutations in the juxtamembrane domain of KIT have been reported in human gastrointestinal stromal tumors. In a family with multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors and diffuse hyperplasia of myenteric plexus layer, we have identified another mutation of KIT, a single base mutation, resulting in the substitution of Glu for Lys(642) in the kinase I domain, and studied its biological effect in a cellular system. The mouse homologue of the human KIT mutant was generated by site-directed mutagenesis and stably transfected into the interleukin-3-dependent Ba/F3 murine cell line. The oncogenic potential of the mutated KIT was assessed in vitro by a proliferation assay and in vivo by transplantation into nude mice. Transfected Ba/F3 cells grew autonomously in absence of growth factors and formed tumors in nude mice. Substitution of Glu for Lys(642) is an oncogenic mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of KIT. As germline heterozygous mutation, it causes a diffuse hyperplasia of myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal during embryonic development and occurrence of multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors at adulthood.

17824795
Imatinib in the management of multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors associated with a germline KIT K642E mutation
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gut and are distinguished by expression of CD117 (c-Kit). Oncogenic mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA gene are detected in approximately 85% of sporadic GISTs. In recent years, examples of familial GIST have been reported in which germline mutations of KIT or PDGFRA result in multiple GISTs, skin disorders, and other abnormalities. The most common germline mutations are in KIT exon 11, mutations in exons 8 and 17 have also been described, and there are 2 families with germline PDGFRA mutations. We present a case in which a germline KIT exon 13 mutation (K642E) was discovered in a patient with multiple GISTs of rectum, small intestine, and esophagus, as well as diffuse hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Cajal. To our knowledge, this is only the second germline example of this particular mutation. The patient's esophageal tumors were stabilized with imatinib.

22626674
[Familial gastrointestinal stroma tumor due to mutation in exon 13 (K642E) of the KIT gene]


24565205
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors with novel germline c-kit gene mutation, K642T, at exon 13
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) caused by germline c-kit gene mutations are an extremely rare autosomal dominant disorder. A 57-year-old Japanese woman was referred to a hospital for appetite loss and severe weight loss. She had 2 large abdominal masses around the stomach, which were surgically resected. Histological examination revealed that these tumors were GISTs. Multiple microscopic GISTs and diffuse hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Cajal were also seen in the background gastric and small intestinal walls. Characteristically, the GISTs showed severe hyalinization with calcification and partial heterotopic ossification, which may have caused the patient's severe dysphagia. Mutational analysis of the c-kit gene revealed a substitution at codon 642 in exon 13 (K642T) in the tumor, normal ileal mucosa and peripheral blood leukocytes, indicating that the mutation is in the germline. This is the first case of multiple GISTs with novel germline c-kit gene mutation at exon 13.

25910686
Molecular characterization of piebaldism in a Tunisian family
Objective:
        
      
      The present study is aimed at performing the molecular characterization of a Tunisian family with piebaldism.

33212994
A Novel Kindred with Familial Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Caused by a Rare KIT Germline Mutation (N655K): Clinico-Pathological Presentation and TKI Sensitivity
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, are characterized by activating mutations in KIT or PDGFRA genes. The vast majority of GISTs are sporadic, but rare hereditary forms have been reported, often featuring multifocality and younger age of onset. We here report the identification of a novel kindred affected by familial GIST caused by a KIT germline mutation in exon 13 (N655K). No family affected by hereditary GIST due to this KIT variant has been reported in literature so far. We were able to track the mutation in three members of the family (proband, mother, and second-degree cousin), all affected by multiple GISTs. Due to its rarity, the N655K variant is poorly characterized. We conducted in vitro drug sensitivity assays that indicated that most tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) currently included in the therapeutic armamentarium for GISTs have a limited inhibitory activity toward this mutation. However, when compared to a classical imatinib-resistant KIT mutation (T670I), N655K was slightly more sensitive to imatinib, and encouraging responses were observed with last-generation TKIs.

1717985
Mutation of the KIT (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) protooncogene in human piebaldism
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized by cogenital patches of skin and hair from which melanocytes are completely absent. A similar disorder of mouse, dominant white spotting (W), results from mutations of the c-Kit protooncogene, which encodes and receptor for mast/stem cell growth factor. We identified a KIT gene mutation in a proband with classic autosomal dominant piebaldism. This mutation results in a Gly----Arg substitution at codon 664, within the tyrosine kinase domain. This substitution was not seen in any normal individuals and was completely linked to the piebald phenotype in the proband's family. Piebaldism in this family thus appears to be the human homologue to dominant white spotting (W) of the mouse.

29200776
Novel KIT Missense Mutation P665S in a Chinese Piebaldism Family


29693058
Piebaldism with multiple café-au-lait-like hyperpigmented macules and inguinal freckling caused by a novel KIT mutation
Keywords:
        
      
      CALM, café-au-lait macules; NF1, neurofibromatosis type 1; TK, tyrosine kinase.

32978145
Genetic landscape of congenital disorders in patients from Southeast Asia: results from sequencing using a gene panel for Mendelian phenotypes
Objective:
        
      
      To test the utility and diagnostic yield of a medical-exome gene panel for identifying pathogenic variants in Mendelian disorders.

25199540
A novel mutation of KIT gene results in piebaldism in a Chinese family


7687267
Novel mutations of the KIT (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) proto-oncogene in human piebaldism
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder of pigmentation characterized by congenital patches of white skin and hair that lack melanocytes. Piebaldism results from mutations of the KIT proto-oncogene, which encodes the cellular receptor transmembrane tyrosine kinase for mast/stem cell growth factor. Here we describe two novel KIT mutations associated with human piebaldism. These amino acid substitutions, located in the most highly conserved sections of the KIT kinase domain, would be expected to dominant-negatively inhibit KIT-dependent signal transduction, resulting in aberrant melanocyte proliferation or migration during embryologic development.

9450866
Piebaldism with deafness: molecular evidence for an expanded syndrome
In a South African girl of Xhosa stock with severe piebaldism and profound congenital sensorineural deafness we identified a novel missense substitution at a highly conserved residue in the intracellular kinase domain of the KIT proto-oncogene, R796G. Though auditory anomalies have been observed in mice with dominant white spotting (W) due to KIT mutations, deafness is not typical in human piebaldism. Thus, the occurrence of sensorineural deafness in this patient extends considerably the phenotypic range of piebaldism due to KIT gene mutation in humans and tightens the clinical similarity between piebaldism and the various forms of Waardenburg syndrome.

23926000
[Identification of novel KIT gene mutations in two Chinese families with piebaldism]
Objective:
        
      
      To screen for potential mutations of KIT gene for two Chinese families affected with piebaldism in order to facilitate genetic counseling and assisted reproduction.

25960657
A novel missense KIT mutation causing piebaldism in one Chinese family associated with café-au-lait macules and intertriginous freckling
Piebaldism is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis, manifesting as congenital and stable depigmentation of the skin and white forelock. It has been found to be associated with mutations in the KIT or SLUG genes. We report a Chinese piebaldism family including a 28-year-old woman and her 3-year-old son with characteristics of white patches and forelock associated with numerous brown macules and patches. Genomic DNA samples of the proband and her son were extracted from their peripheral blood. One hundred unrelated healthy individuals were used as controls. All coding regions of KIT, SLUG, and NF1 genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction using exon flanking intronic primers and Sanger sequencings were performed. DNA sequencing revealed heterozygous missense c.2431T>G mutation in exon 17 of the KIT gene in the proband and the affected son. No potentially pathogenic variant was identified in SLUG or NF1 genes. The nucleotide substitution was not found in 100 unrelated control individuals. This study reveals a novel KIT mutation in piebaldism, and it further supports that café-au-lait macules and intertriginous freckling of piebaldism are parts of pigmented anomaly in piebaldism, which does not necessarily represent coexistence of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).

7479840
Identification of a point mutation in the catalytic domain of the protooncogene c-kit in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients who have mastocytosis with an associated hematologic disorder
Both stem cells and mast cells express c-kit and proliferate after exposure to c-kit ligand. Mutations in c-kit may enhance or interfere with the ability of c-kit receptor to initiate the intracellular pathways resulting in cell proliferation. These observations suggested to us that mastocytosis might in some patients result from mutations in c-kit. cDNA synthesized from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with indolent mastocytosis, mastocytosis with an associated hematologic disorder, aggressive mastocytosis, solitary mastocytoma, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia unassociated with mastocytosis was thus screened for a mutation of c-kit. This analysis revealed that four of four mastocytosis patients with an associated hematologic disorder with predominantly myelodysplastic features had an A-->T substitution at nt 2468 of c-kit mRNA that causes an Asp-816-->Val substitution. One of one patient examined who had mastocytosis with an associated hematologic disorder had the corresponding mutation in genomic DNA. Identical or similar amino acid substitutions in mast cell lines result in ligand-independent autophosphorylation of the c-kit receptor. This mutation was not identified in the patients within the other disease categories or in 67 of 67 controls. The identification of the point mutation Asp816Val in c-kit in patients with mastocytosis with an associated hematologic disorder provides insight not only into the pathogenesis of this form of mastocytosis but also into how hematopoiesis may become dysregulated and may serve to provide a means of confirming the diagnosis, assessing prognosis, and developing intervention strategies.

23621866
Serum tryptase correlates with the KIT D816V mutation burden in adults with indolent systemic mastocytosis
Systemic mastocytosis (SM) is characterized by the growth of neoplastic mast cells (MCs). Most adults with indolent SM carry the KIT D816V mutation. We recently introduced the D816V+ allele fraction as a disease marker in SM using a sensitive and quantitative KIT D816V mutation analysis that consistently allows mutation detection in peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM). The D816V+ allele fraction represents a quantitative measure which allows KIT D816V-positivity to be analyzed as a continuous variable instead of a categorical variable (negative/positive) as previously described. Serum tryptase represents an established disease marker in SM, and it remains to be tested whether tryptase and the D816V+ allele fraction are associated or represent independent disease markers. In this study, correlation analysis between serum tryptase, the D816V+ allele fraction in PB and BM, and the MC fraction was performed in 57 indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM) patients. We detected significant correlations between the D816V+ allele fraction, the mature neoplastic MC fraction, and serum tryptase which represent three different biological measures of disease burden. Mutation analysis was performed in two or more PB samples in 39 patients, and the results demonstrated high stability with no overall tendency to increasing D816V+ allele fractions over time. Considerable variation was nevertheless observed in the correlation analyses. Serum tryptase reflects the mature MC load, whereas the D816V+ allele fraction includes cells other than mature MCs to a variable extent. We conclude that tryptase and the D816V+ allele fraction represent different, although correlated, measures of disease status in SM.

32146645
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors caused by a novel germline KIT gene mutation (Asp820Gly): a case report and literature review
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract; most of them have gain-of-function mutations of the KIT gene. There have been rare cases of families with multiple GISTs, that had autosomal dominant germline KIT mutations. Here, we present a case of multiple GISTs caused by a novel germline KIT mutation. Intraoperatively, the main tumor was present in the body of the stomach, and multiple small nodules were detected mainly in the upper and middle part of the gastric wall; several nodules were also present in the small bowel wall. The main tumor and surrounding nodules were resected. DNA sequencing of the tumor tissue, adjacent normal mucosal tissue, and peripheral blood leukocytes revealed that the patient had germline Asp820Gly mutation in exon 17 of the KIT gene. This is the first case with germline Asp820Gly mutation in exon 17 of the KIT gene.

11984533
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors associated with dysphagia and novel type germline mutation of KIT gene
A family with multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), a new type of germline mutation of KIT gene, and dysphagia is reported. The mutation was observed at Asp-820 in tyrosine kinase (TK) II domain. Mutations in TK II domain have been found in mast cell and germ cell tumors but not in GISTs, and the present family members are the first reported cases of GISTs with TK II domain mutations, including sporadic GISTs. Because interleukin 3-dependent Ba/F3 murine lymphoid cells transfected with the mutant KIT complementary DNA grew autonomously without any growth factors and formed tumors in nude mice, the mutation was considered to be gain-of-function type. Family members with the germline KIT mutation reported dysphagia, but those without the mutation did not. The mechanism of dysphagia was examined with gastrointestinal fiberscopy, endoscopic ultrasonography, and esophageal manometry. No mechanical obstruction was found, and the esophagus was not remarkably dilated. In the family members with dysphagia, endoscopic ultrasonography at the esophagocardiac junction showed a thickened hyperechoic layer between the circular and longitudinal muscle layers, suggesting hyperplasia of interstitial cells of Cajal at the myenteric plexus layer. Manometry showed low resting lower esophageal sphincter pressure and abnormal simultaneous contractions of the esophagus without normal peristalsis. These findings indicate that the dysphagia of the present family is different from typical achalasia. This is the first report of familial dysphagia caused by germline gain-of-function mutation of the KIT gene at the TK II domain.

16327443
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: insights from a new familial GIST kindred with unusual genetic and pathologic features
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder. We report the second family to date with a germline point mutation in exon 17 of the KIT gene that leads to substitution of aspartic acid at position 820 with tyrosine (D820Y). One or more GISTs was documented in three generations of this kindred, and there was associated hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC). One affected family member complained of dysphagia and another suffered small intestinal diverticulosis with perforation, which may represent additional consequences of ICC hyperplasia. Diffuse and nodular ICC hyperplasia associated with the latter family member's small intestinal diverticulosis is illustrated, providing supportive functional and morphologic evidence for the ICC being the cell of origin of GISTs. Skin hyperpigmentation was not observed. Analysis of a 17-cm malignant GIST in the index patient revealed that it was hemi/homozygous for the germline D820Y mutation, indicating loss of the remaining wild-type KIT allele with tumor progression. Two smaller lesions from this patient were heterozygous for the mutation. This phenomenon has been observed in up to 8% of sporadic malignant GISTs but has not been documented in familial disease.

21689725
Novel, activating KIT-N822I mutation in familial cutaneous mastocytosis
Objective:
        
      
      We report the rare family in which cutaneous mastocytosis was diagnosed in the father and two children, with urticaria pigmentosa as the only manifestation of the disease. The diagnosis of mastocytosis in the father included bone marrow histopathological and cytological examinations and flow cytometry, and histopathological examination of the skin. In the children, tryptase measurement and skin histopathological examination were performed.

18724244
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors caused by the novel KIT exon 17 germline mutation N822Y
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are most often associated with oncogenic mutations of the KIT gene resulting in activation of the tyrosine kinase receptor KIT. Familial GIST syndrome based on a hereditary predisposition to develop GIST owing to a germline mutation is exceedingly rare. We describe a kindred with familial GIST displaying a novel germline mutation in exon 17. Three siblings (2 females, 1 male; 42 to 49 y) underwent surgery for multiple intra-abdominal tumors within a 3-year period. Their father had been operated on for gastric and jejunal tumors 20 years previously. The GIST was confirmed by immunohistochemistry in each sibling. Tumor and blood samples of the family members were analyzed for mutations in KIT and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFRalpha) genes. All examined lesions were of spindle cell type with expression of CD117. The tumor material exhibited a novel point mutation in codon 822 in exon 17 resulting in the replacement of asparagine by tyrosine (N822Y). The same mutation was detected in the father's blood sample. One healthy brother of the 3 siblings showed a wild-type sequence of the KIT gene. The germline mutation in exon 17 of the KIT gene identified in this kindred is very different from previously reported mutations of the KIT gene in familial GIST. Although the penetrance of KIT mutations is as yet unknown, assessment of the unaffected kindred of GIST patients for the presence of this mutation could help to distinguish individuals at high risk from those at virtually no risk.

33502802
Genetic skin disorders: The value of a multidisciplinary clinic
Genodermatoses are inherited disorders with skin manifestations and can present with multisystem involvement, resulting in challenges in diagnosis and treatment. To address this, the expertise of dermatology and clinical genetics through a multidisciplinary clinic (Genodermatoses Clinic) were combined. A retrospective cohort study of 45 children seen between March 2018 and February 2019 in the Genodermatoses Clinic at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia was performed. Patient demographics, referral information, genetic testing modality, diagnoses, and patient satisfaction scores were evaluated to assess the clinic's impact. The majority of patients (42.2%) were referred from Dermatology and 86.7% were referred for diagnosis. Two-thirds of the patients were recommended genetic testing, and subsequently 73.3% completed testing. Nearly three-quarters, 26 out of 36 patients (72.2%), of our undiagnosed patients received a clinical and/or molecular diagnosis, which is imperative in managing their care. Twenty-two individuals pursued genetic testing. In eight individuals (36%), molecular testing was diagnostic. However, in two individuals the molecular diagnosis did not completely explain the phenotype. However, there are still obstacles to genetic testing, such as cost of testing and insurance barriers. Almost all (91.4%) rated the Genodermatoses Clinic as "Very Good," the top Press Ganey score. High patient satisfaction scores suggest a positive impact of the Genodermatoses clinic, emphasizing the importance to increase support for the clinical and administrative time needed for patients with genodermatoses.

29923175
Autosomal dominant progressive hyperpigmentation and lentigines in a Japanese pedigree due to a missense mutation near the C-terminus of KIT


31497890
Novel KIT mutation presenting as marked lentiginosis
Although lentigines are usually benign, they can be associated with a number of genetic syndromes in which neoplasms and other multi-system pathological processes occur. Here, we report the case of a 6-year-old girl who presented with atypical lentiginosis and hyperpigmentation caused by a de novo genetic variant in the KIT gene.

19416250
A Japanese piebald patient with auburn hair colour associated with a novel mutation p.P832L in the KIT gene and a homozygous variant p.I120T in the MC1R gene


23190889
A c-kit mutation in exon 18 in familial mastocytosis


9699740
A novel KIT gene missense mutation in a Japanese family with piebaldism


16331568
[A novel KIT gene mutation from a family with piebaldism in the southern part of China]
Objective:
        
      
      To detect the gene mutation of a family with piebaldism.

16365291
The role of microRNA genes in papillary thyroid carcinoma
Apart from alterations in the RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF pathway, comparatively little is known about the genetics of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). We show that numerous microRNAs (miRNAs) are transcriptionally up-regulated in PTC tumors compared with unaffected thyroid tissue. A set of five miRNAs, including the three most up-regulated ones (miR-221, -222, and -146), distinguished unequivocally between PTC and normal thyroid. Additionally, miR-221 was up-regulated in unaffected thyroid tissue in several PTC patients, presumably an early event in carcinogenesis. Tumors in which the up-regulation (11- to 19-fold) of miR-221, -222, and -146 was strongest showed dramatic loss of KIT transcript and Kit protein. In 5 of 10 such cases, this down expression was associated with germline single-nucleotide changes in the two recognition sequences in KIT for these miRNAs. We conclude that up-regulation of several miRs and regulation of KIT are involved in PTC pathogenesis, and that sequence changes in genes targeted by miRNAs can contribute to their regulation.

15194144
New KIT mutations in patients with piebaldism
Background:
        
      
      Piebaldism is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized by congenital leukoderma, typically on the forehead, abdomen, and knees. The leukoderma is usually stable throughout life. KIT mutations have been demonstrated in about 75% of patients with piebaldism.

32220041
KIT-related piebaldism in a Chinese girl
Piebaldism is a rare, autosomal dominant and congenital pigmentary disorder characterized by stable depigmentation of the skin and white forelock. Mutations in KIT or SNAI2 genes result in piebaldism. Most individuals with piebaldism have a family history of the disorder. Herein, we report a 5-month-old Chinese girl with severe piebaldism but no family history thereof. She has white forelock and large patches of depigmentation in the jaw, central anterior trunk, perineum and extremities. We performed whole-exome and Sanger sequencing and identified a de novo KIT mutation (NM_000222.2: c.2657G>A, p.Gly886Val) in exon 18 of KIT in the proband. Currently, this mutation is located in the most extreme C-terminal of the tyrosine kinase domain 2 of the KIT gene amongst all reported mutations and causes a severe clinical phenotype. We further reviewed literature on piebaldism and summarized 79 KIT gene mutations that lead to this disease. Our study may expand knowledge on the genotype-phenotype correlation in piebaldism and serve as a reference for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis of affected families.

32975012
Does SNAI2 mutation cause human piebaldism and Waardenburg syndrome?


31350202
Next Generation Sequencing Reveals Novel Mutations in Mismatch Repair Genes and Other Cancer Predisposition Genes in Asian Patients with Suspected Lynch Syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Although at least 5 genes are implicated in Lynch Syndrome (LS), up to 50% of suspected cases are owing to undefined genes. We utilized next generation sequencing (NGS) to characterize the mutation profile of patients with cancer (CA) suspected to have LS.

27535533
Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans
Large-scale reference data sets of human genetic variation are critical for the medical and functional interpretation of DNA sequence changes. Here we describe the aggregation and analysis of high-quality exome (protein-coding region) DNA sequence data for 60,706 individuals of diverse ancestries generated as part of the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC). This catalogue of human genetic diversity contains an average of one variant every eight bases of the exome, and provides direct evidence for the presence of widespread mutational recurrence. We have used this catalogue to calculate objective metrics of pathogenicity for sequence variants, and to identify genes subject to strong selection against various classes of mutation; identifying 3,230 genes with near-complete depletion of predicted protein-truncating variants, with 72% of these genes having no currently established human disease phenotype. Finally, we demonstrate that these data can be used for the efficient filtering of candidate disease-causing variants, and for the discovery of human 'knockout' variants in protein-coding genes.

1384325
Mutations of the KIT (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) proto-oncogene account for a continuous range of phenotypes in human piebaldism
Piebaldism is a rare autosomal dominant disorder of pigmentation, characterized by congenital patches of white skin and hair from which melanocytes are absent. We have previously shown that piebaldism can result from missense and frameshift mutations of the KIT proto-oncogene, which encodes the cellular receptor tyrosine kinase for the mast/stem cell growth factor. Here, we report two novel KIT mutations associated with human piebaldism. A proximal frameshift is associated with a mild piebald phenotype, and a splice-junction mutation is associated with a highly variable piebald phenotype. We discuss the apparent relationship between the predicted impact of specific KIT mutations on total KIT-dependent signal transduction and the severity of the resultant piebald phenotypes.

24000325
A novel splicing mutation of KIT results in piebaldism and auburn hair color in a Chinese family
Piebaldism is a rare autosomal dominant disorder of melanocyte development, which is mostly caused by KIT gene. The key characteristics of piebaldism include localized poliosis, congenital leukoderma, and other variable manifestations. The previous study has illustrated that the homogeneous MC1R (a gene which is associated with the hair color) variant (p.I120T) coordinating with KIT mutation may lead to auburn hair color and piebaldism. In this study, we have investigated a Chinese family with piebaldism and auburn hair color; the mutation screening of KIT and MC1R genes identified that only a splicing mutation (c. 2484+1G>A) of KIT gene cosegregated with the auburn hair color and piebaldism. The data of this study and others suggests that the KIT mutation may causes of the auburn hair color in the piebaldism patients.

31284637
Congenital Sensorineural Hearing Loss and Inborn Pigmentary Disorders: First Report of Multilocus Syndrome in Piebaldism
Congenital sensorineural hearing loss may occur in association with inborn pigmentary defects of the iris, hair, and skin. These conditions, named auditory-pigmentary disorders (APDs), represent extremely heterogeneous hereditary diseases, including Waardenburg syndromes, oculocutaneous albinism, Tietz syndrome, and piebaldism. APDs are part of the neurocristopathies, a group of congenital multisystem disorders caused by an altered development of the neural crest cells, multipotent progenitors of a wide variety of different lineages, including those differentiating into peripheral nervous system glial cells and melanocytes. We report on clinical and genetic findings of two monozygotic twins from a large Albanian family who showed a complex phenotype featured by sensorineural congenital deafness, severe neuropsychiatric impairment, and inborn pigmentary defects of hair and skin. The genetic analyzes identified, in both probands, an unreported co-occurrence of a new heterozygous germline pathogenic variant (c.2484 + 5G > T splicing mutation) in the KIT gene, consistent with the diagnosis of piebaldism, and a heterozygous deletion at chromosome 15q13.3, responsible for the neuropsychiatric impairment. This case represents the first worldwide report of dual locus inherited syndrome in piebald patients affected by a complex auditory-pigmentary multisystem phenotype. Here we also synthesize the clinical and genetic findings of all known neurocristopathies characterized by a hypopigmentary congenital disorder.

21951831
Preliminary evidence of an association between the functional c-kit rs6554199 polymorphism and achalasia in a Turkish population
Background:
        
      
      C-kit-positive interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) of the lower esophageal sphincter are reduced in achalasia. Two functional gene polymorphisms (rs2237025 and rs6554199) within the c-kit gene may affect its transcriptional activity. In this pilot study, we hypothesized that these polymorphisms would be associated with achalasia.

21119596
A Variant in a MicroRNA complementary site in the 3' UTR of the KIT oncogene increases risk of acral melanoma
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small ∼22nt single stranded RNAs that negatively regulate protein expression by binding to partially complementary sequences in the 3' untranslated region (3' UTRs) of target gene messenger RNAs (mRNA). Recently, mutations have been identified in both miRNAs and target genes that disrupt regulatory relationships, contribute to oncogenesis and serve as biomarkers for cancer risk. KIT, an established oncogene with a multifaceted role in melanogenesis and melanoma pathogenesis, has recently been shown to be upregulated in some melanomas, and is also a target of the miRNA miR-221. Here, we describe a genetic variant in the 3' UTR of the KIT oncogene that correlates with a greater than fourfold increased risk of acral melanoma. This KIT variant results in a mismatch in the seed region of a miR-221 complementary site and reporter data suggests that this mismatch can result in increased expression of the KIT oncogene. Consistent with the hypothesis that this is a functional variant, KIT mRNA and protein levels are both increased in the majority of samples harboring the KIT variant. This work identifies a novel genetic marker for increased heritable risk of melanoma.

30983504
The rs17084733 variant in the KIT 3' UTR disrupts a miR-221/222 binding site in gastrointestinal stromal tumour: a sponge-like mechanism conferring disease susceptibility
Several miRNAs are dysregulated in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST), and miR-221/222 appear to have a prominent role in GIST biology. Therefore, we investigated the role of DNA variants located in miR-221/222 precursor sequences and their target KIT 3'UTR. Ninety-five polymorphisms were analysed in 115 GIST cases and 88 healthy controls. KIT 3'UTR rs17084733 and pri-miR-222 rs75246947 were found significantly associated with GIST susceptibility. Specifically, KIT rs17084733 A allele was more common in GIST, particularly in KIT wild-type (WT) patients (Padj = 0.017). rs17084733 variant is located within one of the three miR-221/222 binding sites in the KIT 3'UTR, resulting in a mismatch in this seed region. Conversely, KIT mRNA levels were lower in patients carrying the variant allele, except for KIT mutant GIST. Luciferase assay data in GIST cells, generated using a construct containing all the three miR-221/222 binding sites, are consistent with KIT mRNA levels in GIST patients. Reporter assay data, generated using a construct containing only the site encompassing rs17084733, confirmed that this is a functional variant disrupting the miR-221/222 binding site. In conclusion, this is the first study investigating the role of SNPs on miR-221/222 precursor sequences and their binding region on KIT 3'UTR in GIST. We identified the KIT variant rs17084733 as a possible novel genetic biomarker for risk of developing KIT-WT GIST. Moreover, our findings suggest the role of one of the three miR-221/222 binding sites on KIT 3'UTR as endogenous sponge, soaking up and subtracting miR-221/222 to the other two sites characterized by a higher affinity.

29631773
In-frame Val 216-Ser 217 deletion of KIT in mild piebaldism causes aberrant secretion and SCF response
Background:
        
      
      Piebaldism is a pigmentary disorder characterized by a white forelock and depigmented patches. Although the loss-of-function mutations in the KIT gene underlie the disease, the intracellular dynamics of the mutant KIT are largely unknown. We herein report a Japanese family with piebaldism in which the affected members showed a mild phenotype.

7694728
A recurrent deletion in the KIT (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor) proto-oncogene is a frequent cause of human piebaldism


16143141
Novel germline mutation of KIT associated with familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors and mastocytosis
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are often associated with activating KIT mutations, affecting regulatory domains of the KIT tyrosine kinase. Sporadic mastocytosis in adults is usually also caused by KIT mutations that, however, activate KIT by affecting the intracellular enzymatic site of the molecule. Most GISTs respond to KIT inhibitors that bind to the enzymatic site; in most cases of mastocytosis, however, the modified enzymatic site is not affected by these drugs. We present a kindred with both familial GISTs and mastocytosis that express a novel germline KIT mutation in exon 8, resulting in deletion of codon 419 and affecting the extracellular domain of KIT. This mutation activates KIT, and the mutant KIT is inhibited by the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate. Our studies identify a new regulatory region in the KIT molecule and strongly suggest that patients with extracellular KIT mutations respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

21854415
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis masquerading as epidermolysis bullosa
A 10-month-old boy presented with a history of a generalized cutaneous bullous eruption since 3 months of age. Emesis, flush, pruritus, and fatigue had accompanied relapsing episodes of sometimes extensive blistering. Histopathology showed dense dermal infiltrates of mast cells on hematoxylin and eosin and corroborating immunohistochemical staining. Laboratory examination revealed a markedly high level of serum tryptase. Based on these results and after consecutive staging, the patient was diagnosed with diffuse cutaneous bullous mastocytosis (BM). Mutation analysis detected a deletion mutation (del419) in C-Kit by direct exon sequencing. This rare entity must be considered in the differential diagnosis whenever a child presents with bullae and erosions. A crucial diagnostic hint is that rubbing of affected skin areas results in whealing (Darier's sign). A comprehensive diagnostic approach, advanced therapeutic strategies, regular follow-ups, and instruction of patients and relatives on prevention and prophylaxis are highly indicated.

9697690
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumours with germline mutation of the KIT gene


25832938
Familial and multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors with fair response to a half-dose of imatinib
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Since our first report in 1998, approximately 30 families with multiple GISTs due to a germline gain-of-function mutation of c-kit have been reported. We herein present a case of a family with multiple GISTs that have a germline c-kit mutation in exon 11 (Del-Val560) in two siblings. One of the patients showed a fair response to treatment with a half-dose of imatinib (200 mg/day). There are few reports describing the response to imatinib in familial GISTs and this drug appears to be a promising therapeutic option.

18183595
Rectal gastrointestinal stromal tumors associated with a novel germline KIT mutation
Somatic, activating mutations of KIT or PDGFRA are early oncogenic events in the majority of sporadic gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Also a number of families with GISTs have been described in recent years. The familial GIST syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder with high penetrance and diverse manifestations associated mostly with germline KIT mutations. In this report, we show a novel germline mutation in the juxtamembrane domain of KIT, identified in 2 brothers, both presenting with recurrent, high risk/malignant rectal GISTs. The KIT p.Q575_P577delinsH mutation was found in tumor samples as well as in peripheral blood leukocytes from both patients, proving that the mutation was indeed inherited. Besides rectal GISTs, no other features characteristic for the familial GIST syndrome was observed in either brother or any of their first-degree relatives. The patients were treated with imatinib, achieving either long-term partial response or stable disease. This observation confirms that imatinib can be successfully used in familial GISTs, as it is used in the sporadic advanced tumors, and that tumors bearing a KIT p.Q575_P577delinsH mutation are responsive to imatinib treatment.

15897563
Analysis of KIT mutations in sporadic and familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors: therapeutic implications through protein modeling
Purpose:
        
      
      Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are characterized by expressing a gain-of-function mutation in KIT, and to a lesser extent, PDGFR. Imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has activity against GISTs that contain oncogenic mutations of KIT. In this study, KIT and PDGFRalpha mutation status was analyzed and protein modeling approaches were used to assess the potential effect of KIT mutations in response to imatinib therapy.

25504284
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor syndrome: report of 2 cases with KIT exon 11 mutation
Background:
        
      
      As with cases of sporadic gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), familial GIST syndrome arises from mutations in KIT or PDGFRA. Only a few dozen such families have been described in the literature.

30280421
Cutaneous hyperpigmentation and familial gastrointestinal stromal tumour associated with KIT mutation
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are mesenchymal tumours arising in the gastrointestinal tract. Early detection, before metastasis occurs, is important as complete surgical excision achieves cure. Approximately 85% of GISTs are associated with mutations in the KIT gene, and although the majority of GISTs are sporadic, familial GISTs have been identified. Several families with multiple GIST tumours have also been described with various cutaneous findings including hyperpigmentation, multiple lentigines, vitiligo and urticaria pigmentosa. We discuss a 6-year-old boy who presented with an unusual pattern of hyperpigmentation in association with a family history of GIST. A causative KIT mutation was identified in DNA from the pigmented skin and from the resected GIST, and the patient was referred to the Paediatric Gastroenterology department for GIST screening. The term 'GIST cutaneous hyperpigmentation disease' has been suggested previously for the association of familial GIST with cutaneous hyperpigmentation caused by a germline KIT mutation.

31370276
Clinical and Genetic Findings in Children with Neurofibromatosis Type 1, Legius Syndrome, and Other Related Neurocutaneous Disorders
Pigmentary manifestations can represent an early clinical sign in children affected by Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), Legius syndrome, and other neurocutaneous disorders. The differential molecular diagnosis of these pathologies is a challenge that can now be met by combining next generation sequencing of target genes with concurrent second-level tests, such as multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and RNA analysis. We clinically and genetically investigated 281 patients, almost all pediatric cases, presenting with either NF1 (n = 150), only pigmentary features (café au lait macules with or without freckling; (n = 95), or clinical suspicion of other RASopathies or neurocutaneous disorders (n = 36). The causative variant was identified in 239 out of the 281 patients analyzed (85.1%), while 42 patients remained undiagnosed (14.9%). The NF1 and SPRED1 genes were mutated in 73.3% and 2.8% of cases, respectively. The remaining 8.9% carried mutations in different genes associated with other disorders. We achieved a molecular diagnosis in 69.5% of cases with only pigmentary manifestations, allowing a more appropriate clinical management of these patients. Our findings, together with the increasing availability and sharing of clinical and genetic data, will help to identify further novel genotype-phenotype associations that may have a positive impact on patient follow-up.

8680409
A 12-bp deletion (7818del12) in the c-kit protooncogene in a large Italian kindred with piebaldism


15099345
Molecular heterogeneity in two families with auditory pigmentary syndromes: the role of neuroimaging and genetic analysis in deafness
We report two cases in which the probands presented with deafness and a family history of a dominantly inherited auditory pigmentary syndrome, yet the cause of deafness in each proband was not associated with the pigmentary abnormalities but was a result of mutations in SLC26A4, the gene mutated in Pendred's syndrome. The first case is a young woman with congenital sensorineural hearing loss and a family history of piebaldism. Despite showing no pigmentary abnormalities, the proband was found to harbor the same KIT mutation as her relatives affected by piebaldism, as well as two mutations in the SLC26A4 gene. In the second case, 2-year-old identical twin boys born to deaf parents presented with congenital sensorineural deafness and an extensive maternal family history of Waardenburg's syndrome type I (WSI). Their father had recessively inherited deafness associated with dilated vestibular aqueducts and a clinical diagnosis of Pendred's syndrome was made in him, which was confirmed molecularly. As the twin boys did not have features of WSI, both the mother and children were tested for mutations in SLC26A4 which showed the mother to be a carrier of a single mutation and both boys to be compound heterozygotes, illustrating pseudodominant inheritance of the condition.

15742474
Novel c-KIT germline mutation in a family with gastrointestinal stromal tumors and cutaneous hyperpigmentation
Mutations in the c-KIT gene have been identified in many sporadic and familial cases of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). We report a familial case of GIST with cutaneous hyperpigmentation associated with a novel germline mutation in the c-KIT gene. Screening for mutations in exon 11 of the c-KIT gene in genomic DNA from tumors and peripheral blood of the members of a family with GISTs was undertaken by direct genomic sequencing. Tumors from GIST patients were analyzed histologically and immunohistochemically. Clinical examination of GIST patients was also performed to detect other systemic diseases associated with c-KIT mutations. Histological study showed that the tumors were GISTs expressing CD34 and c-KIT protein. This GIST-hyperpigmentation disease was associated in the family with a germline mutation in the c-KIT gene. The mutation is a duplication of the sequence CAACTT located in exon 11 of the c-KIT gene, which introduces two extra glutamine and leucine residues in the encoding protein between positions 576 and 577. This Spanish family was affected with GISTs and cutaneous hyperpigmentation associated with a novel germline mutation Leu576_Pro577insGlnLeu in the juxtamembrane domain of the c-KIT receptor. These types of mutation in the c-KIT gene activate the tyrosine kinase activity of the c-KIT receptor and induce constitutive signaling leading to GISTs, in some cases associated with cutaneous hyperpigmentation.

23083126
A novel KIT frame-shift mutation in a large Chinese family with variably severe phenotypes of piebaldism


22438235
Café-au-lait macules and intertriginous freckling in piebaldism: clinical overlap with neurofibromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome
Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital hypopigmented patches of skin and hair and has been found to be associated with mutations in the KIT or SLUG genes. Café-au-lait macules (CALM) may occasionally be seen in piebaldism. There are four reports describing six patients who were said to have both piebaldism and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) due to the presence of multiple CALM and intertriginous freckling, but none of these patients had undergone comprehensive NF1 mutation analysis. We describe a large family with piebaldism in which two members meet diagnostic criteria for NF1 based on the presence of >5 CALM and intertriginous freckling. Interestingly, only these two family members are of mixed race, which could be of importance. A novel complex mutation in the KIT gene was identified in several family members affected with piebaldism; the proband meeting diagnostic criteria for NF1 also underwent comprehensive NF1 and SPRED1 testing with no mutations detected. These findings suggest that piebaldism may occasionally include CALM and intertriginous freckling, which may create diagnostic confusion especially in the absence of a family history of piebaldism. However, careful clinical evaluation and molecular testing if necessary should distinguish these two disorders.

27577211
[Identification of a novel KIT mutation in a Chinese family affected with piebaldism]
Objective:
        
      
      To identify the pathogenic mutation underlying piebaldism in a Chinese family.

32876036
A Familial 4q12 Deletion Involving KIT Gene Causes Piebaldism
Piebaldism is a rare, autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the congenital absence of melanocytes in affected areas of the skin and hair. We report on a familial 4q12 deletion that involves the KIT gene and causes piebaldism in affected individuals. Whole-genome genotyping analysis of the proband using HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 BeadChips (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA, revealed a 1.34-Mb microduplication of 1q21.1q21.2 and a 2.7-Mb microdeletion of 4q12. The analysis of the parents confirmed the paternal origin of the 4q12 microdeletion. The clinical and molecular findings in the proband and his affected relatives showed that the 2.7-Mb 4q12 microdeletion, the smallest microdeletion reported to date, causes isolated piebaldism due to the loss of the KIT gene.

1720553
Deletion of the c-kit protooncogene in the human developmental defect piebald trait
The protooncogene c-kit is critical for development of hematopoietic stem cells, germ cells, and melanoblasts in the mouse. Homozygous mutations of this gene in the mouse cause anemia, infertility, and albinism, whereas heterozygous mutant mice usually exhibit only a white forehead blaze and depigmentation of the ventral body, tail, and feet. The heterozygous mouse phenotype is very similar to human piebald trait, which is characterized by a congenital white hair forelock and ventral and extremity depigmentation. To investigate the possibility that alterations in the human c-kit gene may be a cause of piebald trait, DNA from seven unrelated affected individuals was examined by Southern blot analysis. One subject, although cytogenetically normal, has a heterozygous deletion of the c-kit protooncogene. This deletion encompasses the entire coding region for c-kit and also involves the closely linked gene for platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha. Fluorescence in situ hybridization of genomic c-kit probes to metaphase chromosomes independently confirmed the deletion in this case. These findings provide molecular evidence mapping piebald trait to the c-kit locus on chromosome 4. Although we cannot exclude the involvement of other closely linked genes, the demonstration of a genomic c-kit deletion in one subject with piebald trait and the marked concordance of the human and mouse phenotypes provide strong evidence for the role of c-kit in the development of human melanocytes and in the pathogenesis of piebald trait.

23399981
Homozygosity for piebaldism with a proven KIT mutation resulting in depigmentation of the skin and hair, deafness, developmental delay and autism spectrum disorder


1279971
Deletion of the KIT and PDGFRA genes in a patient with piebaldism
We have previously shown that human piebaldism results from mutations of the KIT gene, which encodes the receptor for the mast/stem cell growth factor and is located in chromosome segment 4q12. Using DNA of a patient with piebaldism, mental retardation, and multiple congenital anomalies associated with a 46,XY,del(4) (q12q21.1) karyotype, we carried out quantitative Southern blot hybridization analyses of the KIT gene and the adjacent PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha subunit) genes. The patient was hemizygous for both the KIT and PDGFRA genes, indicating that both of these genes are included within the deleted region. Therefore, deletion of the KIT and PDGFRA genes may account for the piebald phenotype in this patient.

12407711
De novo pericentric inversion of chromosome 4, inv(4)(p16q12) in a boy with piebaldism and mental retardation
An 8-year-old boy who was diagnosed to have piebaldism had moderate growth and mental retardation. Chromosome analysis from peripheral blood showed pericentric inversion 4(p16q12). The inversion was further confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization using whole chromosome painting and centromeric probes. Chromosomal analysis of parents revealed de novo inheritance of this inversion. This is the first report of pericentric inversion associated with piebald trait.

26872686
Extending the spectrum of AKT1 mosaicism: not just the Proteus syndrome


29681107
Giant umbilical cord and hypoglycemia in an infant with Proteus syndrome
Proteus syndrome (PS) is characterized by the progressive, segmental, or patchy overgrowth of the skin, and other tissues. This is the first case report of recurrent severe insulin-independent hypoglycemia in an infant with PS. Somatic p.E17K of AKT1 mutation was confirmed. The patient also had a giant umbilical cord, which has not yet been reported in PS.

30103035
Severe gynaecological involvement in Proteus Syndrome
Proteus Syndrome is a rare complex overgrowth syndrome. We report a young female patient with Proteus Syndrome due to AKT1 mutation c.49G > A (p.Glu17Lys), presenting with a severe gynaecological involvement which necessitated a complete hysterectomy and a left adnexectomy. Cases of gynecological involvements in Proteus Syndrome are rare, not well known by physicians while they can be potentially severe.

23246288
Germline PIK3CA and AKT1 mutations in Cowden and Cowden-like syndromes
Cowden syndrome (CS) is a difficult-to-recognize multiple hamartoma syndrome with high risks of breast, thyroid, and other cancers. Germline mutations in PTEN on 10q23 were found to cause 85% of CS when accrued from tertiary academic centers, but prospective accrual from the community over the last 12 years has revealed a 25% PTEN mutation frequency. PTEN is the phosphatase that has been implicated in a heritable cancer syndrome and subsequently in multiple sporadic cancers and developmental processes. PTEN antagonizes the AKT1/PI3K signaling pathway and has roles in cell cycle, migration, cell polarity, and apoptosis. We report that 8 of 91 (8.8%) unrelated CS individuals without germline PTEN mutations carried 10 germline PIK3CA mutations (7 missense, 1 nonsense, and 2 indels) and 2 (2.2%) AKT1 mutations. These mutations result in significantly increased P-Thr308-AKT and increased cellular PIP3. Our observations suggest that PIK3CA and AKT1 are CS susceptibility genes.

34070849
Rare Germline Variants in Chordoma-Related Genes and Chordoma Susceptibility
Background:
        
      
      Chordoma is a rare bone cancer with an unknown etiology. TBXT is the only chordoma susceptibility gene identified to date; germline single nucleotide variants and copy number variants in TBXT have been associated with chordoma susceptibility in familial and sporadic chordoma. However, the genetic susceptibility of chordoma remains largely unknown. In this study, we investigated rare germline genetic variants in genes involved in TBXT/chordoma-related signaling pathways and other biological processes in chordoma patients from North America and China.

33111339
Development of a new expanded next-generation sequencing panel for genetic diseases involved in dyslipidemia
The aim of this study was to provide an efficient tool: reliable, able to increase the molecular diagnosis performance, to facilitate the detection of copy number variants (CNV), to assess genetic risk scores (wGRS) and to offer the opportunity to explore candidate genes. Custom SeqCap EZ libraries, NextSeq500 sequencing and a homemade pipeline enable the analysis of 311 dyslipidemia-related genes. In the training group (48 DNA from patients with a well-established molecular diagnosis), this next-generation sequencing (NGS) workflow showed an analytical sensitivity >99% (n = 532 variants) without any false negative including a partial deletion of one exon. In the prospective group, from 25 DNA from patients without prior molecular analyses, 18 rare variants were identified in the first intention panel genes, allowing the diagnosis of monogenic dyslipidemia in 11 patients. In six other patients, the analysis of minor genes and wGRS determination provided a hypothesis to explain the dyslipidemia. Remaining data from the whole NGS workflow identified four patients with potentially deleterious variants. This NGS process gives a major opportunity to accede to an enhanced understanding of the genetic of dyslipidemia by simultaneous assessment of multiple genetic determinants.

18497887
Genetic variation in AKT1 is linked to dopamine-associated prefrontal cortical structure and function in humans
AKT1-dependent molecular pathways control diverse aspects of cellular development and adaptation, including interactions with neuronal dopaminergic signaling. If AKT1 has an impact on dopaminergic signaling, then genetic variation in AKT1 would be associated with brain phenotypes related to cortical dopaminergic function. Here, we provide evidence that a coding variation in AKT1 that affects protein expression in human B lymphoblasts influenced several brain measures related to dopaminergic function. Cognitive performance linked to frontostriatal circuitry, prefrontal physiology during executive function, and frontostriatal gray-matter volume on MRI were altered in subjects with the AKT1 variation. Moreover, on neuroimaging measures with a main effect of the AKT1 genotype, there was significant epistasis with a functional polymorphism (Val158Met) in catechol-O-methyltransferase [COMT], a gene that indexes cortical synaptic dopamine. This genetic interaction was consistent with the putative role of AKT1 in dopaminergic signaling. Supportive of an earlier tentative association of AKT1 with schizophrenia, we also found that this AKT1 variant was associated with risk for schizophrenia. These data implicate AKT1 in modulating human prefrontal-striatal structure and function and suggest that the mechanism of this effect may be coupled to dopaminergic signaling and relevant to the expression of psychosis.

20520724
Epistatic and functional interactions of catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT) and AKT1 on neuregulin1-ErbB signaling in cell models
Background:
        
      
      Neuregulin1 (NRG1)-ErbB signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer and schizophrenia. We have previously reported that NRG1-stimulated migration of B lymphoblasts is PI3K-AKT1dependent and impaired in patients with schizophrenia and significantly linked to the catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT) Val108/158Met functional polymorphism.

28459198
Novel candidate genes may be possible predisposing factors revealed by whole exome sequencing in familial esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma is one of the deadliest of all the cancers. Its metastatic properties portend poor prognosis and high rate of recurrence. A more advanced method to identify new molecular biomarkers predicting disease prognosis can be whole exome sequencing. Here, we report the most effective genetic variants of the Notch signaling pathway in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma susceptibility by whole exome sequencing. We analyzed nine probands in unrelated familial esophageal squamous cell carcinoma pedigrees to identify candidate genes. Genomic DNA was extracted and whole exome sequencing performed to generate information about genetic variants in the coding regions. Bioinformatics software applications were utilized to exploit statistical algorithms to demonstrate protein structure and variants conservation. Polymorphic regions were excluded by false-positive investigations. Gene-gene interactions were analyzed for Notch signaling pathway candidates. We identified novel and damaging variants of the Notch signaling pathway through extensive pathway-oriented filtering and functional predictions, which led to the study of 27 candidate novel mutations in all nine patients. Detection of the trinucleotide repeat containing 6B gene mutation (a slice site alteration) in five of the nine probands, but not in any of the healthy samples, suggested that it may be a susceptibility factor for familial esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Noticeably, 8 of 27 novel candidate gene mutations (e.g. epidermal growth factor, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, MET) act in a cascade leading to cell survival and proliferation. Our results suggest that the trinucleotide repeat containing 6B mutation may be a candidate predisposing gene in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. In addition, some of the Notch signaling pathway genetic mutations may act as key contributors to esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

24463507
De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks
Inherited alleles account for most of the genetic risk for schizophrenia. However, new (de novo) mutations, in the form of large chromosomal copy number changes, occur in a small fraction of cases and disproportionally disrupt genes encoding postsynaptic proteins. Here we show that small de novo mutations, affecting one or a few nucleotides, are overrepresented among glutamatergic postsynaptic proteins comprising activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein (ARC) and N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) complexes. Mutations are additionally enriched in proteins that interact with these complexes to modulate synaptic strength, namely proteins regulating actin filament dynamics and those whose messenger RNAs are targets of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). Genes affected by mutations in schizophrenia overlap those mutated in autism and intellectual disability, as do mutation-enriched synaptic pathways. Aligning our findings with a parallel case-control study, we demonstrate reproducible insights into aetiological mechanisms for schizophrenia and reveal pathophysiology shared with other neurodevelopmental disorders.

32154576
Exploring the genetic pathogenicity of aortic dissection from 72 Han Chinese individuals using next-generation sequencing
Aortic dissection (AD) is a heterogeneous genetic disease with high morbidity and mortality. Although many genes predispose patients to AD, the pathogenic spectrum remains incomplete. This study aims to (a) investigate whether genotype differences exist between Stanford A and B AD individuals, and (b) broaden the pathogenic genetic spectrum of AD and reported novel variants of AD-associated genes. The DNA of 72 unrelated Han Chinese individuals with AD was tested by whole-exome sequencing. Of 142 AD-associated genes, 10 pathogenic variants, and 48 likely pathogenic variants in 36 genes were identified among 39 cases. The diagnostic yield was 54.2%. Of the 58 positive variants, 27 were novel. FBN1 was the most frequently positive gene in both Stanford A and Stanford B. Twenty-seven positive variants from 18 COL family genes were distributed in 36.8% of Stanford A and 6.7% of Stanford B cases. We emphasize that positive variants of COL family genes show distribution predominance and strong pathogenicity in Stanford A, while positive variants of smooth muscle cell pathway genes present distribution advantages mainly in Stanford B cases. Our findings provide a new perspective for both the pathogenic mechanism and the treatment of AD.

28655553
Variant discovery in patients with Mendelian vascular anomalies by next-generation sequencing and their use in patient clinical management
Objective:
        
      
      An accurate "molecular" diagnosis and classification of similar but distinct diseases is sometime challenging but often crucial for the definition of the appropriate patient medical management and treatment as well as for genetic counseling and risk assessment in families. The advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS), which analysed all known disease-associated genes in parallel in a cost- and time-effective manner, eased this process of disease definition and also for vascular anomalies that are a heterogeneous group of vascular tumors and congenital circulatory malformations and often characterized by overlapping phenotypes.

20872231
Functional characterization of a haplotype in the AKT1 gene associated with glucose homeostasis and metabolic syndrome
A small 12-kb haplotype upstream of the AKT1 gene has been found to be associated with insulin resistance phenotypes. We sought to define the functional consequences of the three component polymorphic loci (rs1130214, rs10141867, rs33925946) on AKT1 and the upstream ZBTB42 gene. 5' RACE analysis of AKT1 transcripts in human skeletal muscle biopsies showed the predominant promoter to be 2.5 kb upstream of exon 2, and distinct from those promoters previously reported in rat. We then studied the effect of each of the three haplotype polymorphisms in transcriptional reporter assays in muscle, bone, and fat cell culture models, and found that each modulated enhancer and repressor activity are in a cell-specific and differentiation-specific manner. Our results in promoter assays are consistent with the human phenotype data; we found an anabolic effect on muscle and bone with increased mRNA expression of AKT1, and catabolic effect on fat with decreased expression. To test the hypothesis that rs10141867 affects transcription levels of the novel zinc finger protein ZBTB42 in vivo, we developed the allele-specific expression assay using Taqman technology to test for allelic differences within heterozygotes. The allele containing the derived polymorphism (haplotype H2) showed a 1.75-fold increase in expression in human skeletal muscle. Our data show a particularly complex effect of the component polymorphisms of a single haplotype on cells and tissues, suggesting that the coordination of different tissue-specific effects may have driven selection for the H2 haplotype. In light of the recent abundance of SNP association studies, our approach can serve as a method for exploring the biological function of polymorphisms that show significant genotype/phenotype associations.

26818920
A Functional Polymorphism (rs2494752) in the AKT1 Promoter Region and Gastric Adenocarcinoma Risk in an Eastern Chinese Population
AKT is an important signal transduction protein that plays a crucial role in cancer development. Therefore, we evaluated associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AKT promoter region and gastric cancer (GCa) risk in a case-control study of 1,110 GCa patients and 1,114 matched cancer-free controls. We genotyped five SNPs (AKT1 rs2494750G >C, AKT1 rs2494752A >G, AKT1 rs10138227C >T, AKT2 rs7254617G>A and AKT2 rs2304186G >T) located in the 5' upstream regulatory, first intron or promoter regions. In the logistic regression analysis, a significantly elevated GCa risk was associated with the rs2494752 AG/GG variant genotypes (adjusted odds ratio [OR] = 1.20, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.02-1.42) under a dominant genetic model, and this risk was more evident in subgroups of ever drinkers. The luciferase reporter assay showed that the rs2494752 G allele significantly increased luciferase activity. Our results suggest that the potentially functional AKT1 rs2494752 SNP may affect GCa susceptibility, likely by modulating the AKT1 promoter transcriptional activity. Larger, independent studies are warranted to validate our findings.

21097644
AKT1 G205T genotype influences obesity-related metabolic phenotypes and their responses to aerobic exercise training in older Caucasians
As part of the insulin signalling pathway, Akt influences growth and metabolism. The AKT1 gene G205T (rs1130214) polymorphism has potential functional effects. Thus, we determined whether the G205T polymorphism influences metabolic variables and their responses to aerobic exercise training. Following dietary stabilization, healthy, sedentary, 50- to 75-year-old Caucasian men (n = 51) and women (n = 58) underwent 6 months of aerobic exercise training. Before and after completing the intervention, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry was used to measure percentage body fat, computed tomography to measure visceral and subcutaneous fat, and oral glucose tolerance testing to measure glucose total area under the curve (AUC), insulin AUC and insulin sensitivity. Taqman assay was used to determine AKT1 G205T genotypes. At baseline, men with the GG genotype (n = 29) had lower maximal oxygen consumption (VO2 max) values (P = 0.026) and higher percentage body fat (P = 0.046), subcutaneous fat (P = 0.021) and insulin AUC (P = 0.003) values than T allele carriers (n = 22). Despite their rather disadvantageous starting values, men with the GG genotype seemed to respond to exercise training more robustly than men with the T allele, highlighted by significantly greater fold change improvements in insulin AUC (P = 0.012) and glucose AUC (P = 0.035). Although the GG group also significantly improved VO2 max with training, the change in VO2 max was not as great as that of the T allele carriers (P = 0.037). In contrast, after accounting for hormone replacement therapy use, none of the variables differed in the women at baseline. As a result of exercise training, women with the T allele (n = 20) had greater fold change improvements in fasting glucose (P = 0.011), glucose AUC (P = 0.017) and insulin sensitivity (P = 0.044) than GG genotype women (n = 38). Our results suggest that the AKT1 G205T polymorphism influences metabolic variables and their responses to aerobic exercise training in older, previously sedentary individuals.

27259051
A Common Variant at the 14q32 Endometrial Cancer Risk Locus Activates AKT1 through YY1 Binding
A recent meta-analysis of multiple genome-wide association and follow-up endometrial cancer case-control datasets identified a novel genetic risk locus for this disease at chromosome 14q32.33. To prioritize the functional SNP(s) and target gene(s) at this locus, we employed an in silico fine-mapping approach using genotyped and imputed SNP data for 6,608 endometrial cancer cases and 37,925 controls of European ancestry. Association and functional analyses provide evidence that the best candidate causal SNP is rs2494737. Multiple experimental analyses show that SNP rs2494737 maps to a silencer element located within AKT1, a member of the PI3K/AKT/MTOR intracellular signaling pathway activated in endometrial tumors. The rs2494737 risk A allele creates a YY1 transcription factor-binding site and abrogates the silencer activity in luciferase assays, an effect mimicked by transfection of YY1 siRNA. Our findings suggest YY1 is a positive regulator of AKT1, mediating the stimulatory effects of rs2494737 increasing endometrial cancer risk. Identification of an endometrial cancer risk allele within a member of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, more commonly activated in tumors by somatic alterations, raises the possibility that well tolerated inhibitors targeting this pathway could be candidates for evaluation as chemopreventive agents in individuals at high risk of developing endometrial cancer.

34011629
A method to delineate de novo missense variants across pathways prioritizes genes linked to autism
Genotype-phenotype relationships shape health and population fitness but remain difficult to predict and interpret. Here, we apply an evolutionary action method to de novo missense variants in whole-exome sequences of individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to unravel genes and pathways connected to ASD. Evolutionary action predicts the impact of missense variants on protein function by measuring the fitness effect based on phylogenetic distances and substitution odds in homologous gene sequences. By examining de novo missense variants in 2384 individuals with ASD (probands) compared to matched siblings without ASD, we found missense variants in 398 genes representing 23 pathways that were biased toward higher evolutionary action scores than expected by random chance; these pathways were involved in axonogenesis, synaptic transmission, and neurodevelopment. The predicted fitness impact of de novo and inherited missense variants in candidate genes correlated with the IQ of individuals with ASD, even for new gene candidates. Taking an evolutionary action method, we detected those missense variants most likely to contribute to ASD pathogenesis and elucidated their phenotypic impact. This approach could be applied to integrate missense variants across a patient cohort to identify genes contributing to a shared phenotype in other complex diseases.

32410215
Prenatal exome sequencing in fetuses with congenital heart defects
The genetic diagnosis of congenital heart defects (CHDs) is challenging because of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. The aim of our study was to evaluate the clinical value of whole exome sequencing (WES) in the prenatal diagnosis of CHDs in a large cohort. Trio-based WES was performed in 260 fetuses with CHDs negative for karyotype and chromosome microarray analysis results. WES produced a diagnostic yield of 10% (26/260) in the entire cohort. Relative high diagnostic rate was observed in cases with cardiac rhabdomyoma (60%), complex CHDs (16.7%), septal defect (14.0%), and conotruncal defect (9.9%). There was no significant difference between the diagnostic yields in simple and complex CHDs groups (9.9% vs 16.7%), and in non-isolated and isolated CHDs groups (15.7% vs 7.9%). The diagnostic yields in cases with CHDs with soft markers, CHDs with fetal growth restriction, and CHDs with other structural anomalies (syndromic CHDs) were 0 (0/13), 50% (1/2) and 18.2% (10/55), respectively. Variants of unknown significance were detected in 16 (6.2%) fetuses, and secondary findings in 7 (2.7%) cases. Variants in 14 candidate genes were identified. Our study demonstrates an incremental diagnostic yield by trio-based WES in the prenatal diagnosis of CHDs after routine tests, not as high as expected.

31453292
Effect of parental origin of damaging variants in pro-angiogenic genes on fetal growth in patients with congenital heart defects: Data and analyses
The placenta is a highly vascular structure composed of both maternal and fetal elements. We have determined that damaging variants in genes responsible for the positive regulation of angiogenesis (PRA) (GO:0045766) that are inherited by the fetus impair fetal growth and placental function in pregnancies involving critical congenital cardiac defects (Russell et al., 2019). In this dataset, we present the specific genetic variants identified, describe the parental origin of each variant where possible and present the analyses regarding the potential effects of parental origin of the variant on placental function and fetal growth. The data presented are related to the research article "Damaging variants in pro-angiogenic genes impair growth in fetuses with cardiac defects" (Russell et al., 2019).

33223528
Pathogenic variants causing ABL1 malformation syndrome cluster in a myristoyl-binding pocket and increase tyrosine kinase activity
ABL1 is a proto-oncogene encoding a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase, best known in the somatic BCR-ABL fusion gene associated with chronic myeloid leukaemia. Recently, germline missense variants in ABL1 have been found to cause an autosomal dominant developmental syndrome with congenital heart disease, skeletal malformations and characteristic facies. Here, we describe a series of six new unrelated individuals with heterozygous missense variants in ABL1 (including four novel variants) identified via whole exome sequencing. All the affected individuals in this series recapitulate the phenotype of the ABL1 developmental syndrome and additionally we affirm that hearing impairment is a common feature of the condition. Four of the variants cluster in the myristoyl-binding pocket of ABL1, a region critical for auto-inhibitory regulation of the kinase domain. Bio-informatic analysis of transcript-wide conservation and germline/somatic variation reveals that this pocket region is subject to high missense constraint and evolutionary conservation. Functional work to investigate ABL1 kinase activity in vitro by transient transfection of HEK293T cells with variant ABL1 plasmid constructs revealed increased phosphorylation of ABL1-specific substrates compared to wild-type. The increased tyrosine kinase activity was suppressed by imatinib treatment. This case series of six new patients with germline heterozygous ABL1 missense variants further delineates the phenotypic spectrum of this condition and recognises microcephaly as a common finding. Our analysis supports an ABL1 gain-of-function mechanism due to loss of auto-inhibition, and demonstrates the potential for pharmacological inhibition using imatinib.

28288113
Germline mutations in ABL1 cause an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by congenital heart defects and skeletal malformations
ABL1 is a proto-oncogene well known as part of the fusion gene BCR-ABL1 in the Philadelphia chromosome of leukemia cancer cells. Inherited germline ABL1 changes have not been associated with genetic disorders. Here we report ABL1 germline variants cosegregating with an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital heart disease, skeletal abnormalities, and failure to thrive. The variant c.734A>G (p.Tyr245Cys) was found to occur de novo or cosegregate with disease in five individuals (families 1-3). Additionally, a de novo c.1066G>A (p.Ala356Thr) variant was identified in a sixth individual (family 4). We overexpressed the mutant constructs in HEK 293T cells and observed increased tyrosine phosphorylation, suggesting increased ABL1 kinase activities associated with both the p.Tyr245Cys and p.Ala356Thr substitutions. Our clinical and experimental findings, together with previously reported teratogenic effects of selective BCR-ABL inhibitors in humans and developmental defects in Abl1 knockout mice, suggest that ABL1 has an important role during organismal development.

32643838
The expanding clinical phenotype of germline ABL1-associated congenital heart defects and skeletal malformations syndrome
Congenital heart defects and skeletal malformations syndrome (CHDSKM) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by congenital heart disease, skeletal abnormalities, and failure to thrive. CHDSKM is caused by germline mutations in ABL1. To date, three variants have been in association with CHDSKM. In this study, we describe three de novo missense variants, c.407C>T (p.Thr136Met), c.746C>T (p.Pro249Leu), and c.1573G>A (p.Val525Met), and one recurrent variant, c.1066G>A (p.Ala356Thr), in six patients, thereby expanding the phenotypic spectrum of CHDSKM to include hearing impairment, lipodystrophy-like features, renal hypoplasia, and distinct ocular abnormalities. Functional investigation of the three novel variants showed an increased ABL1 kinase activity. The cardiac findings in additional patients with p.Ala356Thr contribute to the accumulating evidence that patients carrying either one of the recurrent variants, p.Tyr245Cys and p.Ala356Thr, have a high incidence of cardiac abnormalities. The phenotypic expansion has implications for the clinical diagnosis of CHDSKM in patients with germline ABL1 variants.

33783941
Further delineation of van den Ende-Gupta syndrome: Genetic heterogeneity and overlap with congenital heart defects and skeletal malformations syndrome
Van den Ende-Gupta syndrome (VDEGS) is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterized by distinctive facial and skeletal features, and in most affected persons, by biallelic pathogenic variants in SCARF2. We review the type and frequency of the clinical features in 36 reported individuals with features of VDEGS, 15 (42%) of whom had known pathogenic variants in SCARF2, 6 (16%) with negative SCARF2 testing, and 15 (42%) not tested. We also report three new individuals with pathogenic variants in SCARF2 and clinical features of VDEGS. Of the six persons without known pathogenic variants in SCARF2, three remain unsolved despite extensive genetic testing. Three were found to have pathogenic ABL1 variants using whole exome sequencing (WES) or whole genome sequencing (WGS). Their phenotype was consistent with the congenital heart disease and skeletal malformations syndrome (CHDSKM), which has been associated with ABL1 variants. Of the three unsolved cases, two were brothers who underwent WGS and targeted long-range sequencing of both SCARF2 and ABL1, and the third person who underwent WES and RNA sequencing for SCARF2. Because these affected individuals with classical features of VDEGS lacked a detectable pathogenic SCARF2 variant, genetic heterogeneity is likely. Our study shows the importance of performing genetic testing on individuals with the VDEGS "phenotype," either as a targeted gene analysis (SCARF2, ABL1) or WES/WGS. Additionally, individuals with the combination of arachnodactyly and blepharophimosis should undergo echocardiography while awaiting results of molecular testing due to the overlapping physical features of VDEGS and CHDSKM.

34145229
Systematic analysis of exonic germline and postzygotic de novo mutations in bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is a severe mental illness characterized by recurrent manic and depressive episodes. To better understand its genetic architecture, we analyze ultra-rare de novo mutations in 354 trios with bipolar disorder. For germline de novo mutations, we find significant enrichment of loss-of-function mutations in constrained genes (corrected-P = 0.0410) and deleterious mutations in presynaptic active zone genes (FDR = 0.0415). An analysis integrating single-cell RNA-sequencing data identifies a subset of excitatory neurons preferentially expressing the genes hit by deleterious mutations, which are also characterized by high expression of developmental disorder genes. In the analysis of postzygotic mutations, we observe significant enrichment of deleterious ones in developmental disorder genes (P = 0.00135), including the SRCAP gene mutated in two unrelated probands. These data collectively indicate the contributions of both germline and postzygotic mutations to the risk of bipolar disorder, supporting the hypothesis that postzygotic mutations of developmental disorder genes may contribute to bipolar disorder.

26517685
Germ-line variants identified by next generation sequencing in a panel of estrogen and cancer associated genes correlate with poor clinical outcome in Lynch syndrome patients
Background:
        
      
      The risk to develop colorectal and endometrial cancers among subjects testing positive for a pathogenic Lynch syndrome mutation varies, making the risk prediction difficult. Genetic risk modifiers alter the risk conferred by inherited Lynch syndrome mutations, and their identification can improve genetic counseling. We aimed at identifying rare genetic modifiers of the risk of Lynch syndrome endometrial cancer.

33726816
Integration of whole genome sequencing into a healthcare setting: high diagnostic rates across multiple clinical entities in 3219 rare disease patients
Background:
        
      
      We report the findings from 4437 individuals (3219 patients and 1218 relatives) who have been analyzed by whole genome sequencing (WGS) at the Genomic Medicine Center Karolinska-Rare Diseases (GMCK-RD) since mid-2015. GMCK-RD represents a long-term collaborative initiative between Karolinska University Hospital and Science for Life Laboratory to establish advanced, genomics-based diagnostics in the Stockholm healthcare setting.

32946550
Whole-Exome Sequencing of Patients With Recurrent HSV-2 Lymphocytic Mollaret Meningitis
Recurrent lymphocytic meningitis, also referred to as Mollaret meningitis, is a rare neurological disease characterized mainly by reactivation of herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) from sensory ganglia. However, the underlying host immune determinants and viral factors rendering some individuals unable to maintain HSV-2 latency are largely unknown. We collected a cohort of 15 patients diagnosed with Mollaret meningitis. By whole-exome sequencing we identified rare host genetic variants predicted to be deleterious in molecules involved in (1) ubiquitin-proteasome pathways, (2) the autophagy machinery, and (3) cell proliferation/apoptosis. Moreover, infection of patient cells with HSV-2 or stimulation by virus-derived double-stranded DNA ligands revealed reduced antiviral interferon responses in most patients. These findings may contribute to a better understanding of disease pathogenesis and protective immunity to HSV in the central nervous system, and may ultimately be of importance for identification of targets for development of improved prophylaxis and treatment of this disease.

31102422
Predisposing germline mutations in high hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children
High hyperdiploidy (HD) is the most common cytogenetic subtype of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and a higher incidence of HD has been reported in ALL patients with congenital cancer syndromes. We assessed the frequency of predisposing germline mutations in 57 HD-ALL patients from the California Childhood Leukemia Study via targeted sequencing of cancer-relevant genes. Three out of 57 patients (5.3%) harbored confirmed germline mutations that were likely causal, in NBN, ETV6, and FLT3, with an additional six patients (10.5%) harboring putative predisposing mutations that were rare in unselected individuals (<0.01% allele frequency in the Exome Aggregation Consortium, ExAC) and predicted functional (scaled CADD score ≥ 20) in known or potential ALL predisposition genes (SH2B3, CREBBP, PMS2, MLL, ABL1, and MYH9). Three additional patients carried rare and predicted damaging germline mutations in GAB2, a known activator of the ERK/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways and binding partner of PTPN11-encoded SHP2. The frequency of rare and predicted functional germline GAB2 mutations was significantly higher in our patients (2.6%) than in ExAC (0.28%, P = 4.4 × 10-3 ), an observation that was replicated in ALL patients from the TARGET project (P = .034). We cloned patient GAB2 mutations and expressed mutant proteins in HEK293 cells and found that frameshift mutation P621fs led to reduced SHP2 binding and ERK1/2 phosphorylation but significantly increased AKT phosphorylation, suggesting possible RAS-independent leukemogenic effects. Our results support a significant contribution of rare, high penetrance germline mutations to HD-ALL etiology, and pinpoint GAB2 as a putative novel ALL predisposition gene.

30855488
Expanding the clinical and mutational spectrum of germline ABL1 mutations-associated syndrome: A case report
Rationale:
        
      
      Clinical and genetic management of patients with rare syndromes is often a difficult, confusing, and slow task.

26530882
Targeted DNA Sequencing Detects Mutations Related to Susceptibility among Familial Non-medullary Thyroid Cancer
Some studies have demonstrated that familial non-medullary thyroid cancer (FNMTC) has a more aggressive clinical behavior compared to sporadic NMTC (SNMTC). However, FNMTC is difficult to differentiate from SNMTC by the morphology and immunohistochemistry. Although genes responsible for FNMTC were unclear, screening for rare germline mutations on known important tumor suppressor genes might offer more insights on predicting susceptibility to FNMTC. Here, a customized panel was designed to capture all exons of 31 cancer susceptive genes possibly related to FNMTC. Using next-generation sequencing we performed deep sequencing to achieve 500× coverage of the targeted regions. At the end 45 variants were identified in 29 of 47 familial patients and 6 of 16 sporadic patients. Notably, several germline mutations were found matching between paired FNMTC patients from the same family, including APC L292F and A2778S, BRAF D22N, MSH6 G355S and A36V, MSH2 L719F, MEN1 G508D, BRCA1 SS955S, BRCA2 G2508S, and a GNAS inframe insertion. We demonstrated a novel approach to help diagnose and elucidate the genetic cause of the FNMTC patients, and assess whether their family members are exposed to a higher genetic risk. The findings would also provide insights on monitoring the potential second cancers for thyroid cancer patients.

30487145
High-frequency actionable pathogenic exome variants in an average-risk cohort
Exome sequencing is increasingly utilized in both clinical and nonclinical settings, but little is known about its utility in healthy individuals. Most previous studies on this topic have examined a small subset of genes known to be implicated in human disease and/or have used automated pipelines to assess pathogenicity of known variants. To determine the frequency of both medically actionable and nonactionable but medically relevant exome findings in the general population we assessed the exomes of 70 participants who have been extensively characterized over the past several years as part of a longitudinal integrated multiomics profiling study. We analyzed exomes by identifying rare likely pathogenic and pathogenic variants in genes associated with Mendelian disease in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database. We then used American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guidelines for the classification of rare sequence variants. Additionally, we assessed pharmacogenetic variants. Twelve out of 70 (17%) participants had medically actionable findings in Mendelian disease genes. Five had phenotypes or family histories associated with their genetic variants. The frequency of actionable variants is higher than that reported in most previous studies and suggests added benefit from utilizing expanded gene lists and manual curation to assess actionable findings. A total of 63 participants (90%) had additional nonactionable findings, including 60 who were found to be carriers for recessive diseases and 21 who have increased Alzheimer's disease risk because of heterozygous or homozygous APOE e4 alleles (18 participants had both). Our results suggest that exome sequencing may have considerably more utility for health management in the general population than previously thought.

30290804
Genetic diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1: targeted next- generation sequencing with Multiple Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification analysis
Background:
        
      
      Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a dominantly inherited tumor predisposition syndrome that targets the peripheral nervous system. It is caused by mutations of the NF1 gene which serve as a negative regulator of the cellular Ras/MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinases) signaling pathway. Owing to the complexity in some parts of clinical diagnoses and the need for better understanding of its molecular relationships, a genetic characterization of this disorder will be helpful in the clinical setting.

22589294
Prevalence of sequence variants in the RAS-mitogen activated protein kinase signaling pathway in pre-adolescent children with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Background:
        
      
      Most cases of apparently idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in children are caused by mutations in cardiac sarcomere protein genes. HCM also commonly occurs as an associated feature in some patients with disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding components of the RAS-mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Although diagnosis of these disorders is based on typical phenotypic features, the dysmorphic manifestations can be subtle and therefore overlooked. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of mutations in RAS-MAPK genes in preadolescent children with idiopathic HCM.

29907801
Comparative assessment of gene-specific variant distribution in prenatal and postnatal cohorts tested for Noonan syndrome and related conditions
Purpose:
        
      
      To compare the pattern of gene-specific involvement and the spectrum of variants observed in prenatal and postnatal (mean ± SD, 8.9 ± 9.4 years) cohorts tested for Noonan syndrome and related conditions.

33337535
Chiari 1 malformation and exome sequencing in 51 trios: the emerging role of rare missense variants in chromatin-remodeling genes
Type 1 Chiari malformation (C1M) is characterized by cerebellar tonsillar herniation of 3-5 mm or more, the frequency of which is presumably much higher than one in 1000 births, as previously believed. Its etiology remains undefined, although a genetic basis is strongly supported by C1M presence in numerous genetic syndromes associated with different genes. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) in 51 between isolated and syndromic pediatric cases and their relatives was performed after confirmation of the defect by brain magnetic resonance image (MRI). Moreover, in all the cases showing an inherited candidate variant, brain MRI was performed in both parents and not only in the carrier one to investigate whether the defect segregated with the variant. More than half of the variants were Missense and belonged to the same chromatin-remodeling genes whose protein truncation variants are associated with severe neurodevelopmental syndromes. In the remaining cases, variants have been detected in genes with a role in cranial bone sutures, microcephaly, neural tube defects, and RASopathy. This study shows that the frequency of C1M is widely underestimated, in fact many of the variants, in particular those in the chromatin-remodeling genes, were inherited from a parent with C1M, either asymptomatic or with mild symptoms. In addition, C1M is a Mendelian trait, in most cases inherited as dominant. Finally, we demonstrate that modifications of the genes that regulate chromatin architecture can cause localized anatomical alterations, with symptoms of varying degrees.

33004838
Large-scale targeted sequencing identifies risk genes for neurodevelopmental disorders
Most genes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) were identified with an excess of de novo mutations (DNMs) but the significance in case-control mutation burden analysis is unestablished. Here, we sequence 63 genes in 16,294 NDD cases and an additional 62 genes in 6,211 NDD cases. By combining these with published data, we assess a total of 125 genes in over 16,000 NDD cases and compare the mutation burden to nonpsychiatric controls from ExAC. We identify 48 genes (25 newly reported) showing significant burden of ultra-rare (MAF < 0.01%) gene-disruptive mutations (FDR 5%), six of which reach family-wise error rate (FWER) significance (p < 1.25E-06). Among these 125 targeted genes, we also reevaluate DNM excess in 17,426 NDD trios with 6,499 new autism trios. We identify 90 genes enriched for DNMs (FDR 5%; e.g., GABRG2 and UIMC1); of which, 61 reach FWER significance (p < 3.64E-07; e.g., CASZ1). In addition to doubling the number of patients for many NDD risk genes, we present phenotype-genotype correlations for seven risk genes (CTCF, HNRNPU, KCNQ3, ZBTB18, TCF12, SPEN, and LEO1) based on this large-scale targeted sequencing effort.

19206169
Germline BRAF mutations in Noonan, LEOPARD, and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes: molecular diversity and associated phenotypic spectrum
Noonan, LEOPARD, and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes (NS, LS, and CFCS) are developmental disorders with overlapping features including distinctive facial dysmorphia, reduced growth, cardiac defects, skeletal and ectodermal anomalies, and variable cognitive deficits. Dysregulated RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal traffic has been established to represent the molecular pathogenic cause underlying these conditions. To investigate the phenotypic spectrum and molecular diversity of germline mutations affecting BRAF, which encodes a serine/threonine kinase functioning as a RAS effector frequently mutated in CFCS, subjects with a diagnosis of NS (N=270), LS (N=6), and CFCS (N=33), and no mutation in PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, RAF1, MEK1, or MEK2, were screened for the entire coding sequence of the gene. Besides the expected high prevalence of mutations observed among CFCS patients (52%), a de novo heterozygous missense change was identified in one subject with LS (17%) and five individuals with NS (1.9%). Mutations mapped to multiple protein domains and largely did not overlap with cancer-associated defects. NS-causing mutations had not been documented in CFCS, suggesting that the phenotypes arising from germline BRAF defects might be allele specific. Selected mutant BRAF proteins promoted variable gain of function of the kinase, but appeared less activating compared to the recurrent cancer-associated p.Val600Glu mutant. Our findings provide evidence for a wide phenotypic diversity associated with mutations affecting BRAF, and occurrence of a clinical continuum associated with these molecular lesions.

24803665
Structure-energy-based predictions and network modelling of RASopathy and cancer missense mutations
The Ras/MAPK syndromes ('RASopathies') are a class of developmental disorders caused by germline mutations in 15 genes encoding proteins of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway frequently involved in cancer. Little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the differences in mutations of the same protein causing either cancer or RASopathies. Here, we shed light on 956 RASopathy and cancer missense mutations by combining protein network data with mutational analyses based on 3D structures. Using the protein design algorithm FoldX, we predict that most of the missense mutations with destabilising energies are in structural regions that control the activation of proteins, and only a few are predicted to compromise protein folding. We find a trend that energy changes are higher for cancer compared to RASopathy mutations. Through network modelling, we show that partly compensatory mutations in RASopathies result in only minor downstream pathway deregulation. In summary, we suggest that quantitative rather than qualitative network differences determine the phenotypic outcome of RASopathy compared to cancer mutations.

28991257
Contribution of rare inherited and de novo variants in 2,871 congenital heart disease probands
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of mortality from birth defects. Here, exome sequencing of a single cohort of 2,871 CHD probands, including 2,645 parent-offspring trios, implicated rare inherited mutations in 1.8%, including a recessive founder mutation in GDF1 accounting for ∼5% of severe CHD in Ashkenazim, recessive genotypes in MYH6 accounting for ∼11% of Shone complex, and dominant FLT4 mutations accounting for 2.3% of Tetralogy of Fallot. De novo mutations (DNMs) accounted for 8% of cases, including ∼3% of isolated CHD patients and ∼28% with both neurodevelopmental and extra-cardiac congenital anomalies. Seven genes surpassed thresholds for genome-wide significance, and 12 genes not previously implicated in CHD had >70% probability of being disease related. DNMs in ∼440 genes were inferred to contribute to CHD. Striking overlap between genes with damaging DNMs in probands with CHD and autism was also found.

17704260
Cardio-facio-cutaneous and Noonan syndromes due to mutations in the RAS/MAPK signalling pathway: genotype-phenotype relationships and overlap with Costello syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, Noonan syndrome (NS), and Costello syndrome (CS) are clinically related developmental disorders that have been recently linked to mutations in the RAS/MEK/ERK signalling pathway. This study was a mutation analysis of the KRAS, BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2 genes in a total of 130 patients (40 patients with a clinical diagnosis of CFC, 20 patients without HRAS mutations from the French Costello family support group, and 70 patients with NS without PTPN11 or SOS1 mutations). BRAF mutations were found in 14/40 (35%) patients with CFC and 8/20 (40%) HRAS-negative patients with CS. KRAS mutations were found in 1/40 (2.5%) patients with CFC, 2/20 (10%) HRAS-negative patients with CS and 4/70 patients with NS (5.7%). MEK1 mutations were found in 4/40 patients with CFC (10%), 4/20 (20%) HRAS-negative patients with CS and 3/70 (4.3%) patients with NS, and MEK2 mutations in 4/40 (10%) patients with CFC. Analysis of the major phenotypic features suggests significant clinical overlap between CS and CFC. The phenotype associated with MEK mutations seems less severe, and is compatible with normal mental development. Features considered distinctive for CS were also found to be associated with BRAF or MEK mutations. Because of its particular cancer risk, the term "Costello syndrome" should only be used for patients with proven HRAS mutation. These results confirm that KRAS is a minor contributor to NS and show that MEK is involved in some cases of NS, demonstrating a phenotypic continuum between the clinical entities. Although some associated features appear to be characteristic of a specific gene, no simple rule exists to distinguish NS from CFC easily.

18042262
Mutation and phenotypic spectrum in patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous and Costello syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) and Costello syndrome (CS) are congenital disorders with a significant clinical overlap. The recent discovery of heterozygous mutations in genes encoding components of the RAS-RAF-MAPK pathway in both CFC and CS suggested a similar underlying pathogenesis of these two disorders. While CFC is heterogeneous with mutations in BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2 and KRAS, HRAS alterations are almost exclusively associated with CS. We carried out a comprehensive mutation analysis in 51 CFC-affected patients and 31 individuals with CS. Twelve different BRAF alterations were found in twenty-four patients with CFC (47.0%), two MAP2K1 mutations in five (9.8%) and two MAP2K2 sequence variations in three CFC-affected individuals (5.9%), whereas three patients had a KRAS alteration (5.9%). We identified four different missense mutations of HRAS in twenty-eight cases with CS (90.3%), while KRAS mutations were detected in two infants with a phenotype meeting criteria for CS (6.5%). In 14 informative families, we traced the parental origin of HRAS alterations and demonstrated inheritance of the mutated allele exclusively from the father, further confirming a paternal bias in the parental origin of HRAS mutations in CS. Careful clinical evaluation of patients with BRAF and MAP2K1/2 alterations revealed the presence of slight phenotypic differences regarding craniofacial features in MAP2K1- and MAP2K2-mutation positive individuals, suggesting possible genotype-phenotype correlations.

17551924
Further delineation of the phenotype resulting from BRAF or MEK1 germline mutations helps differentiate cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome from Costello syndrome
Because Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome has significant phenotypic overlap with Costello syndrome, it may be difficult to establish the diagnosis on a clinical basis. The recent discoveries of germline HRAS mutations in patients with Costello syndrome and mutations in BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 in CFC syndrome uncovered the biologic mechanism for the shared phenotypic findings based on the close interaction of the affected gene products within the MAP kinase pathway. We evaluated a series of patients who were either clinically diagnosed with Costello syndrome, or in whom the diagnoses of both Costello and CFC syndromes were considered. After excluding mutations in HRAS, we identified eight changes in BRAF and five in MEK1. Five mutations are novel, and all changes occurred de novo among those triads tested. A review of the clinical abnormalities showed important differences between patients with either a BRAF or MEK1 mutation, and those previously reported with an HRAS mutation. Statistical significance was achieved, despite the relatively small number of patients with BRAF and MEK1 mutations reported here, for polyhydramnios, growth hormone deficiency and the presence of more than one papilloma, which were less common in CFC compared to HRAS mutation positive patients. Although both CFC and Costello syndrome are characterized by cardiac abnormalities in about three-fourths of patients, the pattern of congenital heart defects (CHD), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and tachycardia differs somewhat. CHD, especially pulmonic stenosis associated with a secundum-type atrial septal defect, are more common in CFC than Costello syndrome (P = 0.02). Atrial tachycardia is less frequent in CFC patients with BRAF or MEK1 mutations, compared to Costello syndrome patients with HRAS mutation (P = 0.04). Chaotic atrial rhythm or multifocal atrial tachycardia was observed only in Costello syndrome. Malignant tumors have been viewed as characteristic for Costello syndrome due to HRAS mutations, however, we report here on a MEK1 mutation in a patient with a malignant tumor, a hepatoblastoma. Although this indicates that the presence of a tumor is not specific for Costello syndrome with HRAS mutation, it is noteworthy that the tumor histology differs from those commonly seen in Costello syndrome. Based on these clinical differences we suggest that patients with BRAF and MEK mutations should be diagnosed with CFC syndrome, and the diagnosis of Costello syndrome be reserved for patients with HRAS mutations.

27521173
Ocular Manifestations of Noonan Syndrome: A Prospective Clinical and Genetic Study of 25 Patients
Purpose:
        
      
      To determine the full spectrum of ocular manifestations in patients with Noonan syndrome (NS).

30581057
Diagnostic Yield of Intellectual Disability Gene Panels
Background:
        
      
      Recent technological advances have improved the understanding and identification of the genetic basis of intellectual disability (ID) and global developmental delay (GDD). Next-generation sequencing panels of ID genes are now available for clinical testing; however, their overall yield in clinical practice has not yet been investigated.

31560489
Clinical and molecular characterization of children with Noonan syndrome and other RASopathies in Argentina
Introduction:
        
      
      RASopathies are a set of syndromes with phenotypic overlapping features caused by gene mutations involved in the RAS/MAPK pathway. They are autosomal dominantly inherited and share common clinical characteristics, including short stature, craniofacial dysmorphisms, congenital heart disease, ectodermal manifestations, and a higher risk for cancer. A molecular diagnosis is a key factor.

19416762
Novel BRAF mutation in a patient with LEOPARD syndrome and normal intelligence
Noonan syndrome (NS) and related disorders are caused by mutations in various genes encoding molecules involved in the RAS-MAPK signalling cascade. There are strong genotype-phenotype correlations. BRAF is the major gene for cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS), and usually patients with a BRAF mutation have significant cognitive impairment. We report on a patient with LEOPARD syndrome and normal intelligence who was found to carry a novel sequence change in BRAF. The mutation p.L245F was demonstrated to be de novo with no evidence of somatic mosaicism. This observation illustrates that the phenotypic spectrum caused by BRAF mutations is broader than previously assumed and that mental retardation is not necessarily associated. We speculate that the impact of p.L245F on BRAF protein function differs either qualitatively or quantitatively from those mutations associated with CFCS.

16474404
Germline KRAS and BRAF mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects and mental retardation. It phenotypically overlaps with Noonan and Costello syndrome, which are caused by mutations in PTPN11 and HRAS, respectively. In 43 individuals with CFC, we identified two heterozygous KRAS mutations in three individuals and eight BRAF mutations in 16 individuals, suggesting that dysregulation of the RAS-RAF-ERK pathway is a common molecular basis for the three related disorders.

20523244
Non-hodgkin lymphoma in a patient with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, ectodermal abnormalities, and heart defects. Clinically, it overlaps with both Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome. Mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and MAP2K1/2 (MEK1/2) have been identified in patients with CFC syndrome. BRAF mutations are involved in more than 80% of CFC syndrome patients, and we have reported earlier that 2 CFC patients with BRAF mutations developed acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Here we report a boy with CFC syndrome who developed non-Hodgkin lymphoma. At 2 months of age, he developed pneumonia with pleurisy and was diagnosed as having non-Hodgkin lymphoma (precursor T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma) by cytopathologic examination of the pleural fluid. He was suspected of having Noonan syndrome because of his facial appearance, webbed neck, and cubitus valgus. Precursor T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma was treated by the TCCSG NHL 94-04 protocol. At 9 years of age, he was clinically reevaluated and diagnosed as having CFC syndrome because of his distinctive facial appearance, multiple nevi, and moderate mental retardation. Sequencing analysis showed a germline p.A246P (c.736G>C) mutation in BRAF reported earlier in CFC syndrome. Molecular diagnosis and careful observation should be considered in children with CFC syndrome.

33128510
Phenotype-genotype analysis of 242 individuals with RASopathies: 18-year experience of a tertiary center in Brazil
We report the clinical and molecular data of a large cohort comprising 242 individuals with RASopathies, from a single Tertiary Center in Brazil, the largest study from Latin America. Noonan syndrome represented 76% of the subjects, with heterozygous variants in nine different genes, mainly PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, LZTR1, and RIT1, detected by Sanger and next-generation sequencing. The latter was applied to 126 individuals, with a positive yield of 63% in genes of the RAS/MAPK cascade. We present evidence that there are some allelic differences in PTPN11 across distinct populations. We highlight the clinical aspects that pose more medical concerns, such as the cardiac anomalies, bleeding diathesis and proliferative lesions. The genotype-phenotype analysis between the RASopathies showed statistically significant differences in some cardinal features, such as craniofacial and cardiac anomalies, the latter also statistically significant for different genes in Noonan syndrome. We present two individuals with a Noonan syndrome phenotype, one with an atypical, structural cardiac defect, harboring variants in genes mainly associated with isolated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and discuss the role of these variants in their phenotype.

33040082
Clinical and molecular spectra of BRAF-associated RASopathy
Noonan syndrome (NS) and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome are the most common subtypes of RASopathy. As an effector of Ras, BRAF is one of the molecules responsible for RASopathy. We investigated the phenotypic and genotypic features of 26 patients with BRAF-associated RASopathy. The clinical diagnoses were CFC (n = 21, 80.8%), NS (n = 3, 11.5%), NS/CFC (n = 1, 3.8%), and undefined syndromic intellectual disability (ID) (n = 1, 3.8%). The mostly shared phenotypes were ID (90.5%), cutaneous manifestations (84.6%), congenital heart defects (76.9%), short stature (76.9%), and dysmorphic features such as short neck (65.4%) and low-set ears (65.4%). Importantly, moderate to severe ID (57.1%) and epilepsy (26.9%) were noted. Eighteen different missense mutations were found, including a novel mutation, p.Phe498Tyr. p.Gln257Arg (n = 9, 34.6%) was the most common mutation, and the mutations were clustered in the cysteine-rich domain or protein kinase domain. A review of previously reported cases along with our findings revealed the existence of multiple sub-phenotypes of RASopathy within a single genotype, indicating that BRAF-associated RASopathy is not variant-specific. Our study further delineated the diverse and expanded clinical phenotypes of BRAF-associated RASopathy with their molecular genetic characteristics.

28650561
Craniosynostosis in patients with RASopathies: Accumulating clinical evidence for expanding the phenotype
RASopathies are phenotypically overlapping genetic disorders caused by dysregulation of the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. RASopathies include Noonan syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome, Costello syndrome, Neurofibromatosis type 1, Legius syndrome, Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines, Noonan-like syndrome, hereditary gingival fibromatosis, and capillary malformation/arteriovenous malformation syndrome. Recently, six patients with craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome involving KRAS mutations were described in a review, and a patient with craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome involving a SHOC2 mutation has also been reported. Here, we describe patients with craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome due to de novo mutations in PTPN11 and patients with craniosynostosis and CFC syndrome due to de novo mutations in BRAF or KRAS. All of these patients had cranial deformities in addition to the typical phenotypes of CFC syndrome and Noonan syndrome. In RASopathy, patients with cranial deformities, further assessments may be necessary to look for craniosynostosis. Future studies should attempt to elucidate the pathogenic mechanism responsible for craniosynostosis mediated by the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway.

31623504
Diagnostic and Clinical Utility of Clinical Exome Sequencing in Children With Moderate and Severe Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability
Clinical exome sequencing is currently being used in diagnostics of various genetic disorders, but studies supporting its application in clinical setting are scarce. The aim of this study was to establish diagnostic and clinical utility of clinical exome sequencing in patients with moderate and severe global developmental delay/intellectual disability. Clinical diagnosis was made in 49 of 88 investigated patients, with overall diagnostic yield of 55.7%. Molecular findings are characterized in detail, including the impact of newly made diagnosis on clinical management. Several previously unreported genotype-phenotype correlations and 33 novel variants are described. Genetic and clinical data were shared through publicly available database. In conclusion, clinical exome sequencing allows identification of causative variants in a significant proportion of patients in investigated clinical subgroup. Compared to whole exome sequencing, it shows similar diagnostic and clinical utility with reduced costs, which could be of particular importance for institutions with limited resources.

17703371
Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome associated with muscular coenzyme Q10 deficiency
The cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is characterized by congenital heart defect, developmental delay, peculiar facial appearance with bitemporal constriction, prominent forehead, downslanting palpebral fissures, curly sparse hair and abnormalities of the skin. CFC syndrome phenotypically overlaps with Noonan and Costello syndromes. Mutations of several genes (PTPN11, HRAS, KRAS, BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2), involved in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, have been identified in CFC-Costello-Noonan patients. Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a lipophilic molecule present in all cell membranes, functions as an electron carrier in the mitochondrial respiratory chain, where it transports electrons from complexes I and II to complex III. CoQ10 deficiency is a rare treatable mitochondrial disorder with various neurological (cerebellar ataxia, myopathy, epilepsy, mental retardation) and extraneurological (cardiomyopathy, nephropathy) signs that are responsive to CoQ10 supplementation. We report the case of a 4-year-old girl who presented a CFC syndrome, confirmed by the presence of a pathogenic R257Q BRAF gene mutation, together with a muscular CoQ10 deficiency. Her psychomotor development was severely impaired, hindered by muscular hypotonia and ataxia, both improving remarkably after CoQ10 treatment. This case suggests that there is a functional connection between the MAPK pathway and the mitochondria. This could be through the phosphorylation of a nuclear receptor essential for CoQ10 biosynthesis. Another hypothesis is that K-Ras, one of the proteins composing the MAPK pathway, might be recruited into the mitochondria to promote apoptosis. This case highlights that CoQ10 might contribute to the pathogenesis of CFC syndrome.

18413255
Biochemical characterization of novel germline BRAF and MEK mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a sporadic, complex developmental disorder involving characteristic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, growth deficiency, hypotonia, and developmental delay. CFC is caused by alteration of activity through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway due to heterogeneous de novo germline mutations in B-Raf mutant proteins, MEK1 and MEK2. Approximately 75% of individuals with CFC have mutations in BRAF. In vitro functional studies demonstrate that many of these mutations confer increase activity upon the mutant protein as compared to the wildtype protein. However, as is seen cancer, some of the B-Raf mutant proteins are kinase impaired. Western blot analyses corroborate kinase assays as determined by mutant proteins phosphorylating downstream effectors MEK and ERK. Approximately 25% of individuals with CFC have mutations in either MEK1 or MEK2 that lead to increased MEK kinase activity as judged by increased phosphorylation of its downstream effector ERK. Unlike BRAF, no somatic mutations have ever been identified in MEK genes. The identification of novel germline BRAF and MEK mutations in CFC will help understand the pathophysiology of this syndrome. Furthermore, it will also provide insight to the normal function of B-Raf and MEK, and contribute to the knowledge of the role of the MAPK pathway in cancer. Since the MAPK pathway has been studied intensively in the context of cancer, numerous therapeutics that specifically target this pathway may merit investigation in this population of patients.

17366577
Molecular and clinical characterization of cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome: overlapping clinical manifestations with Costello syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome characterized by heart defects, a distinctive facial appearance, ectodermal abnormalities and mental retardation. Clinically, it overlaps with both Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome, which are caused by mutations in two genes, PTPN11 and HRAS, respectively. Recently, we identified mutations in KRAS and BRAF in 19 of 43 individuals with CFC syndrome, suggesting that dysregulation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway is a molecular basis for CFC syndrome. The purpose of this study was to perform comprehensive mutation analysis in 56 patients with CFC syndrome and to investigate genotype-phenotype correlation. We analyzed KRAS, BRAF, and MAP2K1/2 (MEK1/2) in 13 new CFC patients and identified five BRAF and one MAP2K1 mutations in nine patients. We detected one MAP2K1 mutation in three patients and four new MAP2K2 mutations in four patients out of 24 patients without KRAS or BRAF mutations in the previous study [Niihori et al., 2006]. No mutations were identified in MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2) in 21 patients without any mutations. In total, 35 of 56 (62.5%) patients with CFC syndrome had mutations (3 in KRAS, 24 in BRAF, and 8 in MAP2K1/2). No significant differences in clinical manifestations were found among 3 KRAS-positive patients, 16 BRAF-positive patients, and 6 MAP2K1/2-positive patients. Wrinkled palms and soles, hyperpigmentation and joint hyperextension, which have been commonly reported in Costello syndrome but not in CFC syndrome, were observed in 30-40% of the mutation-positive CFC patients, suggesting a significant clinical overlap between these two syndromes.

25463315
Is diagnosing cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome still a challenge? Delineation of the phenotype in 15 Polish patients with proven mutations, including novel mutations in the BRAF1 gene
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is characterized by a variable degree of developmental delay and congenital anomalies, including characteristic facial, cardiac, and ectodermal abnormalities. It is caused by activating mutations in the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. In, however, approximately 10%-30% of individuals with a clinical diagnosis of CFCS, no mutation of the causative gene is found. Therefore, clinical studies in patients with the CFCS spectrum are valuable. To investigate the phenotypic spectrum and molecular diversity of germline mutations affecting genes encoding serine/threonine kinases, a group of 15 children and young adults with a diagnosis of CFCS was screened. We documented three novel mutations in the BRAF gene and correlated clinical findings with causative mutations in the BRAF or MEK1/MEK2 genes.

30525188
Diagnostic exome sequencing in 100 consecutive patients with both epilepsy and intellectual disability
Objective:
        
      
      Epilepsy is highly prevalent among patients with intellectual disability (ID), and seizure control is often difficult. Identification of the underlying etiology in this patient group is important for daily clinical care. We assessed the diagnostic yield of whole exome sequencing (WES). In addition, we evaluated which clinical characteristics influence the likelihood of identifying a genetic cause and we assessed the potential impact of the genetic diagnosis on (antiepileptic) treatment strategy.

23321623
Prenatal diagnostic testing of the Noonan syndrome genes in fetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings
In recent studies on prenatal testing for Noonan syndrome (NS) in fetuses with an increased nuchal translucency (NT) and a normal karyotype, mutations have been reported in 9-16% of cases. In this study, DNA of 75 fetuses with a normal karyotype and abnormal ultrasound findings was tested in a diagnostic setting for mutations in (a subset of) the four most commonly mutated NS genes. A de novo mutation in either PTPN11, KRAS or RAF1 was detected in 13 fetuses (17.3%). Ultrasound findings were increased NT, distended jugular lymphatic sacs (JLS), hydrothorax, renal anomalies, polyhydramnios, cystic hygroma, cardiac anomalies, hydrops fetalis and ascites. A second group, consisting of anonymized DNA of 60 other fetuses with sonographic abnormalities, was tested for mutations in 10 NS genes. In this group, five possible pathogenic mutations have been identified (in PTPN11 (n=2), RAF1, BRAF and MAP2K1 (each n=1)). We recommend prenatal testing of PTPN11, KRAS and RAF1 in pregnancies with an increased NT and at least one of the following additional features: polyhydramnios, hydrops fetalis, renal anomalies, distended JLS, hydrothorax, cardiac anomalies, cystic hygroma and ascites. If possible, mutation analysis of BRAF and MAP2K1 should be considered.

26607044
New Mutations Associated with Rasopathies in a Central European Population and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations
We performed the genetic analysis of Rasopathy syndromes in patients from Central European by direct sequencing followed by next generation sequencing of genes associated with Rasopathies. All 51 patients harboured the typical features of Rasopathy syndromes. Thirty-five mutations were identified in the examined patients (22 in PTPN11, two in SOS1, one in RIT1, one in SHOC2, two in HRAS, three in BRAF, two in MAP2K1 and two in the NF1 gene). Two of them (p.Gly392Glu in the BRAF gene and p.Gln164Lys in the MAP2K1 gene) were novel with a potentially pathogenic effect on the structure of these proteins. Statistically significant differences in the presence of pulmonary stenosis (63.64% vs. 23.81%, P = 0.013897) and cryptorchidism (76.47% vs. 30%, P = 0.040224) were identified as the result of comparison of the prevalence of phenotypic features in patients with the phenotype of Noonan syndrome and mutation in the PTPN11 gene, with the prevalence of the same features in patients without PTPN11 mutation. Cryptorchidism as a statistically significant feature in our patients with PTPN11 mutation was not reported as significant in other European countries (Germany, Italy and Greece). The majority of mutations were clustered in exons 3 (45.45%), 8 (22.73%), and 13 (22.73%) of the PTPN11 gene.

30919572
Clinical exome sequencing in 509 Middle Eastern families with suspected Mendelian diseases: The Qatari experience
Background:
        
      
      Clinical exome sequencing (CES) is rapidly becoming the diagnostic test of choice in patients with suspected Mendelian diseases especially those that are heterogeneous in etiology and clinical presentation. Reporting large CES series can inform guidelines on best practices for test utilization, and improves accuracy of variant interpretation through clinically-oriented data sharing.

29752777
Study of Ras/MAPK pathway gene variants in Chilean patients with Cryptorchidism
Cryptorchidism is one of the most common congenital disorders in boys, and several genetic, hormonal, and environmental factors have been proposed as possible causes for this genitourinary defect. Genetic factors have been intensively searched, but relatively few pathogenic variants have been described. Cryptorchidism is a frequent finding in patients with RASopathies, a group of syndrome caused by mutations in genes of the Ras/MAPK pathway. Our aim was to determine whether patients with isolated cryptorchidism (IC) exhibit Ras/MAPK pathway gene variants associated with RASopathies. Two hundred thirty-nine patients with IC were recruited after orchidopexy. Determination of Ras/MAPK pathway gene variants was performed by high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis followed by sequencing. Restriction or allele-specific amplification assay was applied to (i) variant confirmation; (ii) search in healthy controls; and (iii) segregation analysis. Controls correspond to 100 healthy Chilean adults without a history of cryptorchidism. Molecular analysis showed one synonymous substitution (BRAF_p.Q456Q) in two patients and four missense substitutions (SOS1_ p.R497Q, BRAF_ p.F595L, NRAS_ p.T50I, and MAP2K2_ p.Y134C) in five patients. Our results suggest that some patients with isolated cryptorchidism, but with no evidence of dysmorphic features suggestive of RASopathies, may harbor Ras/MAPK pathway gene alterations.

31336229
Antenatal diagnosis of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: Prenatal characteristics and contribution of fetal facial dysmorphic signs in utero. About a case and review of literature
Antenatal diagnosis of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: prenatal characteristics and contribution of fetal facial dysmorphic signs in utero. This paper is a case study and review of literature. "RASopathies" is the term coined for a group of genetic diseases that share modulation inside the MAPKinase pathway. Mutations inside the coding sequence of any of these genes may be responsible for the upregulation of the RAS pathway, leading on the clinical level to Type 1 Neurofibromatosis (NF1), Noonan syndrome (NS), Costello syndrome (CS), Multiple Lentigines, Loose Anagen Hair syndrome, Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syndrome (CFCS), and, more recently, Legius syndrome. While the postnatal presentation of this group is well-known, prenatal findings are less well recognized. The presence of a RASopathy during the prenatal period can be suspected on account of non-specific abnormalities: polyhydramnios, cystic hygroma or high nuchal translucency, macrosomia with proportionate short long bones, macrocephaly, renal, lymphatic, or cardiac defects. The current case report underlines the characteristic dysmorphic facial features on 3D-ultrasound (hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, a long and marked philtrum, and low-set posteriorly rotated ears) that allow for a "RASopathy" to be postulated. After detecting a copy number variation (CNV) absence on a CGH array, we performed a RASopathy gene panel analysis, which identified a so-far unreported heterozygous de novo mutation in the BRAF gene (namely NM_004333.4 : c.1396 G > C ; p.Gly466Arg). Genetic counseling has, therefore, focused on the diagnosis of a RASopathy and predictable phenotype of CFCS, a distinct entity characterized by an increased risk of intellectual disability and early-onset feeding problems. We suggest that a more detailed prenatal facial evaluation should be performed in fetuses presenting high nuchal thickness, heart defects, or unusual findings, along with the absence of a CNV on a CGH array. Due to the dysmorphic facial features, targeted RASopathy genes are presumed to likely to be responsible for NS, CFCS, and CS.

21062266
Dermatological findings in 61 mutation-positive individuals with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
Background:
        
      
      The RASopathies are a class of human genetic syndromes that are caused by germline mutations in genes which encode components of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, congenital heart defects, and abnormalities of the skin and hair.

16439621
Germline mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a sporadic developmental disorder involving characteristic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, and developmental delay. We demonstrate that heterogeneous de novo missense mutations in three genes within the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway cause CFC syndrome. The majority of cases (18 out of 23) are caused by mutations in BRAF, a gene frequently mutated in cancer. Of the 11 mutations identified, two result in amino acid substitutions that occur in tumors, but most are unique and suggest previously unknown mechanisms of B-Raf activation. Furthermore, three of five individuals without BRAF mutations had missense mutations in either MEK1 or MEK2, downstream effectors of B-Raf. Our findings highlight the involvement of the MAPK pathway in human development and will provide a molecular diagnosis of CFC syndrome.

23093928
A structural systems biology approach for quantifying the systemic consequences of missense mutations in proteins
Gauging the systemic effects of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) is an important topic in the pursuit of personalized medicine. However, it is a non-trivial task to understand how a change at the protein structure level eventually affects a cell's behavior. This is because complex information at both the protein and pathway level has to be integrated. Given that the idea of integrating both protein and pathway dynamics to estimate the systemic impact of missense mutations in proteins remains predominantly unexplored, we investigate the practicality of such an approach by formulating mathematical models and comparing them with experimental data to study missense mutations. We present two case studies: (1) interpreting systemic perturbation for mutations within the cell cycle control mechanisms (G2 to mitosis transition) for yeast; (2) phenotypic classification of neuron-related human diseases associated with mutations within the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. We show that the application of simplified mathematical models is feasible for understanding the effects of small sequence changes on cellular behavior. Furthermore, we show that the systemic impact of missense mutations can be effectively quantified as a combination of protein stability change and pathway perturbation.

29084544
Targeted/exome sequencing identified mutations in ten Chinese patients diagnosed with Noonan syndrome and related disorders
Background:
        
      
      Noonan syndrome (NS) and Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML) are autosomal dominant developmental disorders. NS and NSML are caused by abnormalities in genes that encode proteins related to the RAS-MAPK pathway, including PTPN11, RAF1, BRAF, and MAP2K. In this study, we diagnosed ten NS or NSML patients via targeted sequencing or whole exome sequencing (TS/WES).

24303953
Fetal autopsy findings of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome with a unique BRAF mutation
Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a RASopathy phenotypically characterized by facial, cardiac, and ectodermal abnormalities. The extent to which this phenotype is expressed in the affected fetus is unclear, and a better understanding of the fetal autopsy findings in CFC syndrome could facilitate diagnosis and understanding of the developmental effects of dysregulated BRAF activity. Here we describe the fetal autopsy findings in a case of CFC syndrome in a 17-week fetus with a novel BRAF mutation that demonstrates potential similarities and differences with the postnatal presentation of CFC syndrome.

22488759
Autoimmune disease and multiple autoantibodies in 42 patients with RASopathies
The association of RASopathies [Noonan syndrome (NS) and Noonan-related syndromes] and autoimmune disorders has been reported sporadically. However, a concomitant evaluation of autoimmune diseases and an assessment of multiple autoantibodies in a large population of patients with molecularly confirmed RASopathy have not been performed. The clinical and laboratory features were analyzed in 42 RASopathy patients, the majority of whom had NS and five individuals had Noonan-related disorders. The following autoantibodies were measured: Anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double stranded DNA, anti-SS-A/Ro, anti-SS-B/La, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-Scl-70, anti-Jo-1, anti-ribosomal P, IgG and IgM anticardiolipin (aCL), thyroid, anti-smooth muscle, anti-endomysial (AE), anti-liver cytosolic protein type 1 (LC1), anti-parietal cell (APC), anti-mitochondrial (AM) antibodies, anti-liver-kidney microsome type 1 antibodies (LKM-1), and lupus anticoagulant. Six patients (14%) fulfilled the clinical criteria for autoimmune diseases [systemic lupus erythematous, polyendocrinopathy (autoimmune thyroiditis and celiac disease), primary antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS), autoimmune hepatitis, vitiligo, and autoimmune thyroiditis]. Autoimmune antibodies were observed in 52% of the patients. Remarkably, three (7%) of the patients had specific gastrointestinal and liver autoantibodies without clinical findings. Autoimmune diseases and autoantibodies were frequently present in patients with RASopathies. Until a final conclusion of the real incidence of autoimmunity in Rasopathy is drawn, the physicians should be alerted to the possibility of this association and the need for a fast diagnosis, proper referral to a specialist and ultimately, adequate treatment.

31292302
Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis in Japanese patients with Noonan syndrome
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a heterogeneous disorder with multiple congenital malformations. Recent advances in molecular and genetic approaches have identified a number of responsible genes for NS, most of which are components of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway, and genotype-phenotype correlation analyses have been extensively performed; however, analysis of Japanese NS patients is limited. Here, we evaluated clinical characteristics in genetically diagnosed NS patients and their relationships to genotypes. A total of 48 clinically diagnosed NS were included, and responsible mutations were identified in 39 patients (81.3%) with PTPN11 mutations being the most prevalent followed by SOS1 mutations. Cardiac anomalies including pulmonary stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were most prevalent (87.2%), and the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was greater in patients without PTPN11 mutations than in those with PTPN11 mutations. Short stature was the second-most prevalent (69.2%) characteristic, and present height SD score was significantly associated with height SD score at 1 year old. Patients with SOS1 mutations had greater present height SD score and better growth during infancy. These findings suggest the presence of a genotype-phenotype correlation in Japanese patients with NS, which enables us to use genetic information to predict the clinical course and may allow for genotype-based medical interventions.

33482860
Musculo-skeletal phenotype of Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: insights on the functional assessment status
Background:
        
      
      Costello syndrome (CS) and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS) belong to the RASopathies, a group of neurodevelopmental disorders with skeletal anomalies. Due to their rarity, the characterization of the musculo-skeletal phenotype in both disorders has been poorly characterized.

22495831
Prevalence and clinical features of Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome in Japan: findings from a nationwide epidemiological survey
Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome are congenital anomaly syndromes characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects, and intellectual disability. Germline mutations in HRAS cause Costello syndrome, and mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and MAP2K1/2 (MEK1/2) cause CFC syndrome. Since the discovery of the causative genes, approximately 150 new patients with each syndrome have been reported. However, the clinico-epidemiological features of these disorders remain to be identified. In order to assess the prevalence, natural history, prognosis, and tumor incidence associated with these diseases, we conducted a nationwide prevalence study of patients with Costello and CFC syndromes in Japan. Based on the result of our survey, we estimated a total number of patients with either Costello syndrome or CFC syndrome in Japan of 99 (95% confidence interval, 77-120) and 157 (95% confidence interval, 86-229), respectively. The prevalences of Costello and CFC syndromes are estimated to be 1 in 1,290,000 and 1 in 810,000 individuals, respectively. An evaluation of 15 adult patients 18-32 years of age revealed that 12 had moderate to severe intellectual disability and most live at home without constant medical care. These results suggested that the number of adult patients is likely underestimated and our results represent a minimum prevalence. This is the first epidemiological study of Costello syndrome and CFC syndrome. Identifying patients older than 32 years of age and following up on the patients reported here is important to estimate the precise prevalence and the natural history of these disorders.

31475041
Prenatal Diagnosis of Fetuses With Increased Nuchal Translucency by Genome Sequencing Analysis
Background: Increased nuchal translucency (NT) is an important biomarker associated with increased risk of fetal structural anomalies. It is known to be contributed by a wide range of genetic etiologies from single-nucleotide variants to those affecting millions of base pairs. Currently, prenatal diagnosis is routinely performed by karyotyping and chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA); however, both of them have limited resolution. The diversity of the genetic etiologies warrants an integrated assay such as genome sequencing (GS) for comprehensive detection of genomic variants. Herein, we aim to evaluate the feasibility of applying GS in prenatal diagnosis for the fetuses with increased NT. Methods: We retrospectively applied GS (> 30-fold) for fetuses with increased NT (≥3.5 mm) who underwent routine prenatal diagnosis. Detection of single-nucleotide variants, copy number variants, and structural rearrangements was performed simultaneously, and the results were integrated for interpretation in accordance with the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants were selected for validation and parental confirmation, when available. Results: Overall, 50 fetuses were enrolled, including 34 cases with isolated increased NT and 16 cases with other fetal structural malformations. Routine CMA and karyotyping reported eight P/LP CNVs, yielding a diagnostic rate of 16.0% (8/50). In comparison, GS provided a twofold increase in diagnostic yield (32.0%, 16/50), including one mosaic turner syndrome, eight cases with microdeletions/microduplications, and seven cases with P/LP point mutations. Moreover, GS identified two cryptic insertions and two inversions. Follow-up study further demonstrated the potential pathogenicity of an apparently balanced insertion that disrupted an OMIM autosomal dominant disease-causing gene at the insertion site. Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that applying GS in fetuses with increased NT can comprehensively detect and delineate the various genomic variants that are causative to the diseases. Importantly, prenatal diagnosis by GS doubled the diagnostic yield compared with routine protocols. Given a comparable turnaround time and less DNA required, our study provides strong evidence to facilitate GS in prenatal diagnosis, particularly in fetuses with increased NT.

24800029
A Novel Missense Mutation in BRAF Caused Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome
Keywords:
        
      
      BRAF Protein; Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome; Human; Mutation.

29696744
NGS testing for cardiomyopathy: Utility of adding RASopathy-associated genes
RASopathies include a group of syndromes caused by pathogenic germline variants in RAS-MAPK pathway genes and typically present with facial dysmorphology, cardiovascular disease, and musculoskeletal anomalies. Recently, variants in RASopathy-associated genes have been reported in individuals with apparently nonsyndromic cardiomyopathy, suggesting that subtle features may be overlooked. To determine the utility and burden of adding RASopathy-associated genes to cardiomyopathy panels, we tested 11 RASopathy-associated genes by next-generation sequencing (NGS), including NGS-based copy number variant assessment, in 1,111 individuals referred for genetic testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Disease-causing variants were identified in 0.6% (four of 692) of individuals with HCM, including three missense variants in the PTPN11, SOS1, and BRAF genes. Overall, 36 variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) were identified, averaging ∼3VUSs/100 cases. This study demonstrates that adding a subset of the RASopathy-associated genes to cardiomyopathy panels will increase clinical diagnoses without significantly increasing the number of VUSs/case.

26918529
Retrospective study of prenatal ultrasound findings in newborns with a Noonan spectrum disorder
Objectives:
        
      
      Noonan spectrum disorders (NSDs) occur in 1:1000-2500 live births. Currently, there are no guidelines for prenatal molecular genetic testing for NSDs. Recent studies recommend prenatal testing for NSDs when ultrasonography detects two or more associated abnormalities. A stronger association between ultrasound findings and NSDs would enable more informed prenatal genetic testing.

28524057
An adult case of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome with BRAF mutation


30406758
Nevus cells of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome bear BRAF germ-line and somatic double mutations


20395089
Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome with infantile spasms and delayed myelination
A girl with cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome due to a BRAF gene mutation (c.1454T→C, p.L485S) experienced repetitive epileptic spasms at the corrected age of 4 months. Electroencephalograms revealed hypsarrhythmia, and magnetic resonance imaging identified delayed myelination and a hypoplastic corpus callosum. Various antiepileptic treatments, including adrenocorticotropic hormone therapy, were ineffective, although transient seizure control was achieved by a ketogenic diet and clorazepate dipotassium. However, seizures with epileptic foci at the bilateral posterior temporal areas re-aggravated and remained intractable; severe psychomotor delay persisted. This case indicated that infantile spasms in CFC syndrome can be difficult to control and may be accompanied by severe psychomotor retardation and abnormal myelination.

21871821
Epilepsy in RAS/MAPK syndrome: two cases of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome with epileptic encephalopathy and a literature review
We report two individual cases of cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome with severe neurological impairment consisting of infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia and refractory epilepsy with multifocal epileptic paroxysms such as modified hypsarrhythmia. Both cases shared diffuse brain atrophy and severely delayed myelination on neuroimaging. Genetic analysis revealed individual heterozygous mutations in the KRAS (phenotype of CFC/Noonan syndrome) and BRAF genes (phenotype of CFC syndrome). Neurological impairment in cases with mutations in the RAS/MAPK (mitogen activated protein kinase) signal pathway may be more severe, and could be linked to some forms of refractory epilepsy, especially epileptic encephalopathy that includes infantile spasms.

24719372
The perinatal presentation of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
There is limited information available related to the perinatal course of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC) compared to other syndromes within the Ras-MAP kinase pathway (rasopathies) such as Noonan and Costello syndrome. Retrospective chart review revealed four cases of CFC with molecular confirmation between 2005 and 2012 at Hawaii's largest obstetric and pediatric referral center. We report on details of the prenatal, neonatal, and infancy course and long-term follow-up beyond infancy in two patients. This report includes novel features including systemic hypertension, hyponatremia, and chronic respiratory insufficiency, not previously reported in CFC. We provide pathologic diagnosis of loose anagen hair in one patient. Some of these findings have been reported in the other rasopathies, documenting further clinical overlap among these conditions. Molecular testing can be useful to differentiate CFC from other rasopathies and in counseling families about potential complications and prognosis. We recommend a full phenotypic evaluation including echocardiogram, renal ultrasound, brain imaging, and ophthalmology examination. We additionally recommend close follow-up of blood pressure, pulmonary function, and monitoring for electrolyte disturbance and extra-vascular fluid shifts.

17483702
Leukemia in Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome: a patient with a germline mutation in BRAF proto-oncogene
Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, ectodermal abnormalities, and heart defects. Clinically, it overlaps with both Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome, which are caused by mutations in 2 genes that encode molecules of the RAS/MAPK (mitogen activated protein kinase) pathway (PTPN11 and HRAS, respectively). Recently, mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and MEK1/2 have been identified in patients with CFC syndrome. Somatic mutations in KRAS and BRAF have been identified in various tumors. In contrast, the association with malignancy has not been noticed in CFC syndrome. Here we report a 9-year-old boy diagnosed with CFC syndrome and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Sequencing analysis of the entire coding region of KRAS and BRAF showed a de novo germline BRAF E501G (1502A-->G) mutation. Molecular diagnosis and careful observations should be considered in children with CFC syndrome because they have germline mutations in proto-oncogenes and might develop malignancy.

30094826
Unusual hair findings in a child with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome


31573083
Mutational spectrum by phenotype: panel-based NGS testing of patients with clinical suspicion of RASopathy and children with multiple café-au-lait macules
Children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) may exhibit an incomplete clinical presentation, making difficult to reach a clinical diagnosis. A phenotypic overlap may exist in children with other RASopathies or with other genetic conditions if only multiple café-au-lait macules (CALMs) are present. The syndromes that can converge in these inconclusive phenotypes have different clinical courses. In this context, an early genetic testing has been proposed to be clinically useful to manage these patients. We present the validation and implementation into diagnostics of a custom NGS panel (I2HCP, ICO-IMPPC Hereditary Cancer Panel) for testing patients with a clinical suspicion of a RASopathy (n = 48) and children presenting multiple CALMs (n = 102). We describe the mutational spectrum and the detection rates identified in these two groups of individuals. We identified pathogenic variants in 21 out of 48 patients with clinical suspicion of RASopathy, with mutations in NF1 accounting for 10% of cases. Furthermore, we identified pathogenic mutations mainly in the NF1 gene, but also in SPRED1, in more than 50% of children with multiple CALMs, exhibiting an NF1 mutational spectrum different from a group of clinically diagnosed NF1 patients (n = 80). An NGS panel strategy for the genetic testing of these two phenotype-defined groups outperforms previous strategies.

33300679
Clinical and molecular analysis of 26 individuals with Noonan syndrome in a reference institution in Colombia
Our aim was to characterize the phenotype and genotype of individuals with Noonan syndrome in Colombia. There are published cohorts of Noonan individuals from several countries in Latin America including Brazil, Chile, and Argentina, but none from Colombia. We described 26 individuals with NS from a single large referral center in the South West of Colombia using an established database in the genetics department and hospital records search using ICD-10 codes. All patients included in this study were evaluated by a medical geneticist and have molecular confirmation of NS diagnosis. The median age at referral was 3.5 years (range, 0-39), and at molecular diagnosis was 5 years (range, 0-40). Patients mostly originated from the southwest region of Colombia (19/26, 73%). Pathogenic variants in PTPN11 are the most common cause of NS in Colombian individuals followed by SHOC2 and SOS1 variants. The prevalence of cardiomyopathy was low in this population compared to other populations. Further research is needed with a larger sample size and including different regions of Colombia to correlate our findings. This study provides new information about time to diagnosis of NS in Colombia, genotypes, and provides important information to help develop guidelines for diagnosis and management of this disease in the region.

26633542
Clinical application of whole-exome sequencing across clinical indications
Purpose:
        
      
      We report the diagnostic yield of whole-exome sequencing (WES) in 3,040 consecutive cases at a single clinical laboratory.

33644862
Genetic and phenotypic analysis of 101 patients with developmental delay or intellectual disability using whole-exome sequencing
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) enables identification of pathogenic variants, including copy number variants (CNVs). In this study, we performed WES in 101 Japanese patients with unexplained developmental delay (DD) or intellectual disability (ID) (63 males and 38 females), 98 of them with trio-WES. Pathogenic variants were identified in 54 cases (53.5%), including four cases with pathogenic CNVs. In one case, a pathogenic variant was identified by reanalysis of exome data; and in two cases, two molecular diagnoses were identified. Among 58 pathogenic variants, 49 variants occurred de novo in 48 patients, including two somatic variants. The accompanying autism spectrum disorder and external ear anomalies were associated with detection of pathogenic variants with odds ratios of 11.88 (95% confidence interval [CI] 2.52-56.00) and 3.46 (95% CI 1.23-9.73), respectively. These findings revealed the importance of reanalysis of WES data and detection of CNVs and somatic variants in increasing the diagnostic yield for unexplained DD/ID. In addition, genetic testing is recommended when patients suffer from the autism spectrum disorder or external ear anomalies, which potentially suggests the involvement of genetic factors associated with gene expression regulation.

16804887
Distinguishing Costello versus cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: BRAF mutations in patients with a Costello phenotype


24451042
Diagnosis of Noonan syndrome and related disorders using target next generation sequencing
Background:
        
      
      Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant developmental disorder with a high phenotypic variability, which shares clinical features with other rare conditions, including LEOPARD syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair, and Costello syndrome. This group of related disorders, so-called RASopathies, is caused by germline mutations in distinct genes encoding for components of the RAS-MAPK signalling pathway. Due to high number of genes associated with these disorders, standard diagnostic testing requires expensive and time consuming approaches using Sanger sequencing. In this study we show how targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technique can enable accurate, faster and cost-effective diagnosis of RASopathies.

22876591
A cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome case with tight Achilles tendons
Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS) is a multiple congenital anomaly disorder characterized by craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal anomalies and neurocognitive delay. Clinical findings of patients with CFCS show similarities to those of patients with Costello Syndrome (CS). CFCS and CS are caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins of the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway. Musculoskeletal findings including tight Achilles tendons and contractures of elbows, shoulders or hips have been reported in CS patients. However, limited extension of joints were observed in some patients with CFCS. According to the literature, no tight Achilles tendons have been reported in CFCS patients so far. In this case report, we present a male CFCS patient with tight Achilles tendons with a de-novo heterozygote N581D mutation in the BRAF gene detected by DNA sequence analysis.

33027564
Exome Sequencing for Prenatal Diagnosis in Nonimmune Hydrops Fetalis
Background:
        
      
      The cause of most fetal anomalies is not determined prenatally. Exome sequencing has transformed genetic diagnosis after birth, but its usefulness for prenatal diagnosis is still emerging. Nonimmune hydrops fetalis (NIHF), a fetal abnormality that is often lethal, has numerous genetic causes; the extent to which exome sequencing can aid in its diagnosis is unclear.

33683002
Congenital polyvalvular disease expands the cardiac phenotype of the RASopathies
The RASopathies are a group of similar genetic syndromes with cardiovascular abnormalities, characteristic facial features, short stature, abnormalities of the skin and musculoskeletal system, and variable neurodevelopmental challenges. The most common cardiovascular abnormalities include pulmonary valvular stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Congenital polyvalvular disease (CPVD) refers to congenital dysplasia of two or more cardiac valves. We diagnosed a RASopathy in two individuals with CPVD and noted that CPVD in RASopathies has rarely been reported in the literature. Thus, we performed a retrospective chart review and literature review to investigate the association and characterize the phenotype of CPVD in the RASopathies. CPVD was present in 2.5% (n = 6/243) of individuals in our RASopathy cohort. Involvement of two cardiac valves, commonly the aortic and pulmonic valves, was seen in the majority of individuals (6/8; 75%) in our cohort, but only 27% (3/11) of reported CPVD and RASopathy cases in the literature. CPVD should be considered an associated cardiovascular phenotype of the RASopathies, which has implications for diagnosis and management.

22506009
B-RAF mutant alleles associated with Langerhans cell histiocytosis, a granulomatous pediatric disease
Background:
        
      
      Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) features inflammatory granuloma characterised by the presence of CD1a+ dendritic cells or 'LCH cells'. Badalian-Very et al. recently reported the presence of a canonical (V600E)B-RAF mutation in 57% of paraffin-embedded biopsies from LCH granuloma. Here we confirm their findings and report the identification of two novel B-RAF mutations detected in LCH patients.

30732632
Clinical and mutation profile of pediatric patients with RASopathy-associated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: results from a Chinese cohort
Background:
        
      
      The RASopathies are a class of developmental disorders caused by germline mutations in the RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) has been frequently described in children with RASopathy, but only a minority of patients have received formal genotyping. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the genetic basis and clinical outcome of pediatric patients with RASopathy-associated HCM.

20735442
Germline mutation in BRAF codon 600 is compatible with human development: de novo p.V600G mutation identified in a patient with CFC syndrome
BRAF, the protein product of BRAF, is a serine/threonine protein kinase and one of the direct downstream effectors of Ras. Somatic mutations in BRAF occur in numerous human cancers, whereas germline BRAF mutations cause cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome. One recurrent somatic mutation, p.V600E, is frequently found in several tumor types, such as melanoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, colon cancer, and ovarian cancer. However, a germline mutation affecting codon 600 has never been described. Here, we present a patient with CFC syndrome and a de novo germline mutation involving codon 600 of BRAF, thus providing the first evidence that a pathogenic germline mutation involving this critical codon is not only compatible with development but can also cause the CFC phenotype. In vitro functional analysis shows that this mutation, which replaces a valine with a glycine at codon 600 (p.V600G), leads to increased ERK and ELK phosphorylation compared to wild-type BRAF but is less strongly activating than the cancer-associated p.V600E mutation.

25533962
Large-scale discovery of novel genetic causes of developmental disorders
Despite three decades of successful, predominantly phenotype-driven discovery of the genetic causes of monogenic disorders, up to half of children with severe developmental disorders of probable genetic origin remain without a genetic diagnosis. Particularly challenging are those disorders rare enough to have eluded recognition as a discrete clinical entity, those with highly variable clinical manifestations, and those that are difficult to distinguish from other, very similar, disorders. Here we demonstrate the power of using an unbiased genotype-driven approach to identify subsets of patients with similar disorders. By studying 1,133 children with severe, undiagnosed developmental disorders, and their parents, using a combination of exome sequencing and array-based detection of chromosomal rearrangements, we discovered 12 novel genes associated with developmental disorders. These newly implicated genes increase by 10% (from 28% to 31%) the proportion of children that could be diagnosed. Clustering of missense mutations in six of these newly implicated genes suggests that normal development is being perturbed by an activating or dominant-negative mechanism. Our findings demonstrate the value of adopting a comprehensive strategy, both genome-wide and nationwide, to elucidate the underlying causes of rare genetic disorders.

28832562
A clinically driven variant prioritization framework outperforms purely computational approaches for the diagnostic analysis of singleton WES data
Rapid identification of clinically significant variants is key to the successful application of next generation sequencing technologies in clinical practice. The Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance (MGHA) variant prioritization framework employs a gene prioritization index based on clinician-generated a priori gene lists, and a variant prioritization index (VPI) based on rarity, conservation and protein effect. We used data from 80 patients who underwent singleton whole exome sequencing (WES) to test the ability of the framework to rank causative variants highly, and compared it against the performance of other gene and variant prioritization tools. Causative variants were identified in 59 of the patients. Using the MGHA prioritization framework the average rank of the causative variant was 2.24, with 76% ranked as the top priority variant, and 90% ranked within the top five. Using clinician-generated gene lists resulted in ranking causative variants an average of 8.2 positions higher than prioritization based on variant properties alone. This clinically driven prioritization approach significantly outperformed purely computational tools, placing a greater proportion of causative variants top or in the top 5 (permutation P-value=0.001). Clinicians included 40 of the 49 WES diagnoses in their a priori list of differential diagnoses (81%). The lists generated by PhenoTips and Phenomizer contained 14 (29%) and 18 (37%) of these diagnoses respectively. These results highlight the benefits of clinically led variant prioritization in increasing the efficiency of singleton WES data analysis and have important implications for developing models for the funding and delivery of genomic services.

29453417
Exome sequencing has higher diagnostic yield compared to simulated disease-specific panels in children with suspected monogenic disorders
As test costs decline, whole-exome sequencing (WES) has become increasingly used for clinical diagnosis, and now represents the primary alternative to gene panel testing for patients with a suspected genetic disorder. We sought to compare the diagnostic yield of singleton-WES with simulated application of commercial gene panels in children suspected of having a genetically heterogeneous condition. Recruitment, singleton-WES and phenotype-driven variant analysis was completed for 145 paediatric patients. At recruitment, clinicians were required to propose commercial gene panel tests as an alternative to WES and nominate a phenotype-driven candidate gene list. In WES-diagnosed children, three commercial options for each proposed panel were identified and evaluated for hypothetical diagnostic yield assuming 100% analytical sensitivity and specificity. We compared the price of WES with the least costly panel in WES-diagnosed children. In WES-undiagnosed children, we evaluated the exonic coverage of their phenotype-driven gene list using aggregate data. WES diagnoses were made in genes not included in at least one-of-three commercial panels in 42% of cases. Had a panel been selected instead, 23% of WES-diagnosed children would not have been diagnosed. In 26% of cases, the least costly panel option would have been more expensive than WES. Evaluation of WES coverage found that at the most stringent level of 20× coverage, the likelihood of missing a clinically relevant variant in a candidate gene list was maximally 8%. The broader coverage of WES makes it a superior alternative to gene panel testing at similar financial cost for children with suspected complex monogenic phenotypes.

32746448
Genetic variant burden and adverse outcomes in pediatric cardiomyopathy
Background:
        
      
      Previous genetic research in pediatric cardiomyopathy (CM) has focused on pathogenic variants for diagnostic purposes, with limited data evaluating genotype-outcome correlations. We explored whether greater genetic variant burden (pathogenic or variants of unknown significance, VUS) correlates with worse outcomes.

33303739
A flexible computational pipeline for research analyses of unsolved clinical exome cases
Exome sequencing has enabled molecular diagnoses for rare disease patients but often with initial diagnostic rates of ~25-30%. Here we develop a robust computational pipeline to rank variants for reassessment of unsolved rare disease patients. A comprehensive web-based patient report is generated in which all deleterious variants can be filtered by gene, variant characteristics, OMIM disease and Phenolyzer scores, and all are annotated with an ACMG classification and links to ClinVar. The pipeline ranked 21/34 previously diagnosed variants as top, with 26 in total ranked ≤7th, 3 ranked ≥13th; 5 failed the pipeline filters. Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants by ACMG criteria were identified for 22/145 unsolved cases, and a previously undefined candidate disease variant for 27/145. This open access pipeline supports the partnership between clinical and research laboratories to improve the diagnosis of unsolved exomes. It provides a flexible framework for iterative developments to further improve diagnosis.

30842599
Leucine-485 deletion variant of BRAF may exhibit the severe end of the clinical spectrum of CFC syndrome
The genotype-phenotype correlation in BRAF variant in cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome is not clearly defined. Here we report a case with a severe clinical phenotype and a novel BRAF variant, p.Leu485del. The present case showed severe intellectual disability, impaired awareness, hyperekplexia, involuntary movements, early onset refractory seizures, and delayed myelination on brain magnetic resonance imaging as well as a polycystic and dysplastic kidney, which are previously unreported anomalies in CFC or RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase syndromes related to BRAF variant. CFC syndrome, especially caused by BRAF variant, should be included in the differential diagnosis of patients with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies and hyperekplexia. Furthermore, we need to keep in mind that missense variants or the deletion of Leucine-485 may be associated with severe symptoms.

33297573
Yield of Rare Variants Detected by Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing in a Cohort of Romanian Index Patients with Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Background:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to explore the rare variants in a cohort of Romanian index cases with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).

21862832
BRAF gene deletion broadens the clinical spectrum neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous syndromes
Point mutations in the human BRAF gene are associated with a group of heterogeneous autosomal dominant neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous syndromes. We identified a novel 93 kb intragenic deletion of the BRAF gene in a boy with severe developmental encephalopathy using microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization. The unique genotype and phenotype in this patient expands the spectrum of BRAF-related neurodevelopmental disorders. We propose a BRAF gene loss-of-function mechanism to best explain the biological basis of this severe developmental encephalopathy with postnatal growth deficiency.

32888943
Efficacy and economics of targeted panel versus whole-exome sequencing in 878 patients with suspected primary immunodeficiency
Background:
        
      
      Next-generation sequencing has become a first-line tool for the diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency. However, patient access remains limited because of restricted insurance coverage and a lack of guidelines addressing the use of targeted panels versus whole-exome sequencing (WES).

28594414
Genotype and phenotype spectrum of NRAS germline variants
RASopathies comprise a group of disorders clinically characterized by short stature, heart defects, facial dysmorphism, and varying degrees of intellectual disability and cancer predisposition. They are caused by germline variants in genes encoding key components or modulators of the highly conserved RAS-MAPK signalling pathway that lead to dysregulation of cell signal transmission. Germline changes in the genes encoding members of the RAS subfamily of GTPases are rare and associated with variable phenotypes of the RASopathy spectrum, ranging from Costello syndrome (HRAS variants) to Noonan and Cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes (KRAS variants). A small number of RASopathy cases with disease-causing germline NRAS alterations have been reported. Affected individuals exhibited features fitting Noonan syndrome, and the observed germline variants differed from the typical oncogenic NRAS changes occurring as somatic events in tumours. Here we describe 19 new cases with RASopathy due to disease-causing variants in NRAS. Importantly, four of them harbored missense changes affecting Gly12, which was previously described to occur exclusively in cancer. The phenotype in our cohort was variable but well within the RASopathy spectrum. Further, one of the patients (c.35G>A; p.(Gly12Asp)) had a myeloproliferative disorder, and one subject (c.34G>C; p.(Gly12Arg)) exhibited an uncharacterized brain tumour. With this report, we expand the genotype and phenotype spectrum of RASopathy-associated germline NRAS variants and provide evidence that NRAS variants do not spare the cancer-associated mutation hotspots.

31697451
NRAS associated RASopathy and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma
RASopathies are a group of phenotypically overlapping disorders that arise from dysregulation of the RAS/MAPK pathway. These disorders include Noonan syndrome, Costello syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome, and neurofibromatosis-Type 1. While somatic mutations in the three human Ras genes (KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS) are a common finding in a variety of cancers, germline mutations in each of the these genes cause developmental RASopathy phenotypes with mutations in specific genes typically correlating with specific phenotypes. We present the case of a germline heterozygous NRAS mutation producing a severe phenotype involving embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, severe intellectual disability, and numerous melanocytic nevi in addition to more typical manifestations of Noonan syndrome. Additionally, the specific p.G12R NRAS mutation in this case is a common somatic mutation in cancer cells, and analysis of previously reported NRAS-RASopathy cases suggests that mutations at traditionally oncogenic codons are associated with elevated cancer risk not present with mutations at other sites.

31031743
Targeted NGS Platforms for Genetic Screening and Gene Discovery in Primary Immunodeficiencies
Background: Primary Immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are a heterogeneous group of genetic immune disorders. While some PIDs can manifest with more than one phenotype, signs, and symptoms of various PIDs overlap considerably. Recently, novel defects in immune-related genes and additional variants in previously reported genes responsible for PIDs have been successfully identified by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), allowing the recognition of a broad spectrum of disorders. Objective: To evaluate the strength and weakness of targeted NGS sequencing using custom-made Ion Torrent and Haloplex (Agilent) panels for diagnostics and research purposes. Methods: Five different panels including known and candidate genes were used to screen 105 patients with distinct PID features divided in three main PID categories: T cell defects, Humoral defects and Other PIDs. The Ion Torrent sequencing platform was used in 73 patients. Among these, 18 selected patients without a molecular diagnosis and 32 additional patients were analyzed by Haloplex enrichment technology. Results: The complementary use of the two custom-made targeted sequencing approaches allowed the identification of causative variants in 28.6% (n = 30) of patients. Twenty-two out of 73 (34.6%) patients were diagnosed by Ion Torrent. In this group 20 were included in the SCID/CID category. Eight out of 50 (16%) patients were diagnosed by Haloplex workflow. Ion Torrent method was highly successful for those cases with well-defined phenotypes for immunological and clinical presentation. The Haloplex approach was able to diagnose 4 SCID/CID patients and 4 additional patients with complex and extended phenotypes, embracing all three PID categories in which this approach was more efficient. Both technologies showed good gene coverage. Conclusions: NGS technology represents a powerful approach in the complex field of rare disorders but its different application should be weighted. A relatively small NGS target panel can be successfully applied for a robust diagnostic suspicion, while when the spectrum of clinical phenotypes overlaps more than one PID an in-depth NGS analysis is required, including also whole exome/genome sequencing to identify the causative gene.

19775298
Germ-line mutation of the NRAS gene may be responsible for the development of juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia
We report the case of a child with clinical and haematological features indicative of juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia (JMML). The patient showed dysmorphic features: high forehead, bilateral epicanthal folds, long eyebrows, low nasal bridge and slightly low-set ears. A 38G>A (G13D) mutation in exon 1 of the NRAS gene was first demonstrated on peripheral blood cells, and then confirmed on granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units. The same mutation was also found in buccal swab, hair bulbs, endothelial cells, skin fibroblasts. This case suggests for the first time that constitutional mutations of NRAS may be responsible for development of a myeloproliferative/myelodysplastic disorder in children.

17517660
NRAS mutation causes a human autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
The p21 RAS subfamily of small GTPases, including KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS, regulates cell proliferation, cytoskeletal organization, and other signaling networks, and is the most frequent target of activating mutations in cancer. Activating germline mutations of KRAS and HRAS cause severe developmental abnormalities leading to Noonan, cardio-facial-cutaneous, and Costello syndrome, but activating germline mutations of NRAS have not been reported. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is the most common genetic disease of lymphocyte apoptosis and causes autoimmunity as well as excessive lymphocyte accumulation, particularly of CD4(-), CD8(-) alphabeta T cells. Mutations in ALPS typically affect CD95 (Fas/APO-1)-mediated apoptosis, one of the extrinsic death pathways involving TNF receptor superfamily proteins, but certain ALPS individuals have no such mutations. We show here that the salient features of ALPS as well as a predisposition to hematological malignancies can be caused by a heterozygous germline Gly13Asp activating mutation of the NRAS oncogene that does not impair CD95-mediated apoptosis. The increase in active, GTP-bound NRAS augments RAF/MEK/ERK signaling, which markedly decreases the proapoptotic protein BIM and attenuates intrinsic, nonreceptor-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis. Thus, germline activating mutations in NRAS differ from other p21 Ras oncoproteins by causing selective immune abnormalities without general developmental defects. Our observations on the effects of NRAS activation indicate that RAS-inactivating drugs, such as farnesyltransferase inhibitors should be examined in human autoimmune and lymphocyte homeostasis disorders.

21263000
Noonan syndrome gain-of-function mutations in NRAS cause zebrafish gastrulation defects
Noonan syndrome is a relatively common developmental disorder that is characterized by reduced growth, wide-set eyes and congenital heart defects. Noonan syndrome is associated with dysregulation of the Ras-mitogen-activated-protein-kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Recently, two mutations in NRAS were reported to be associated with Noonan syndrome, T50I and G60E. Here, we report a mutation in NRAS, resulting in an I24N amino acid substitution, that we identified in an individual bearing typical Noonan syndrome features. The I24N mutation activates N-Ras, resulting in enhanced downstream signaling. Expression of N-Ras-I24N, N-Ras-G60E or the strongly activating mutant N-Ras-G12V, which we included as a positive control, results in developmental defects in zebrafish embryos, demonstrating that these activating N-Ras mutants are sufficient to induce developmental disorders. The defects in zebrafish embryos are reminiscent of symptoms in individuals with Noonan syndrome and phenocopy the defects that other Noonan-syndrome-associated genes induce in zebrafish embryos. MEK inhibition completely rescued the activated N-Ras-induced phenotypes, demonstrating that these defects are mediated exclusively by Ras-MAPK signaling. In conclusion, mutations in NRAS from individuals with Noonan syndrome activated N-Ras signaling and induced developmental defects in zebrafish embryos, indicating that activating mutations in NRAS cause Noonan syndrome.

22855653
NRAS Mutations in Noonan Syndrome
Noonan syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder caused by mutations in PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1 and less frequently in KRAS, NRAS or SHOC2. Here, we performed mutation analysis of NRAS and SHOC2 in 115 PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, and KRAS mutation-negative individuals. No SHOC2 mutations were found, but we identified 3 NRAS mutations in 3 probands. One NRAS mutation was novel. The phenotype associated with germline NRAS mutations is variable. Our results confirm that a small proportion of Noonan syndrome patients carry germline NRAS mutations.

19966803
A restricted spectrum of NRAS mutations causes Noonan syndrome
Noonan syndrome, a developmental disorder characterized by congenital heart defects, reduced growth, facial dysmorphism and variable cognitive deficits, is caused by constitutional dysregulation of the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway. Here we report that germline NRAS mutations conferring enhanced stimulus-dependent MAPK activation account for some cases of this disorder. These findings provide evidence for an obligate dependency on proper NRAS function in human development and growth.

32581362
Whole-genome sequencing of patients with rare diseases in a national health system
Most patients with rare diseases do not receive a molecular diagnosis and the aetiological variants and causative genes for more than half such disorders remain to be discovered1. Here we used whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in a national health system to streamline diagnosis and to discover unknown aetiological variants in the coding and non-coding regions of the genome. We generated WGS data for 13,037 participants, of whom 9,802 had a rare disease, and provided a genetic diagnosis to 1,138 of the 7,065 extensively phenotyped participants. We identified 95 Mendelian associations between genes and rare diseases, of which 11 have been discovered since 2015 and at least 79 are confirmed to be aetiological. By generating WGS data of UK Biobank participants2, we found that rare alleles can explain the presence of some individuals in the tails of a quantitative trait for red blood cells. Finally, we identified four novel non-coding variants that cause disease through the disruption of transcription of ARPC1B, GATA1, LRBA and MPL. Our study demonstrates a synergy by using WGS for diagnosis and aetiological discovery in routine healthcare.

22887781
Constitutional NRAS mutations are rare among patients with Noonan syndrome or juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
Recently, germline mutations of NRAS have been shown to be associated with Noonan syndrome (NS), a relatively common developmental disorder characterized by short stature, congenital heart disease, and distinctive facial features. We report on the mutational analysis of NRAS in a cohort of 125 French patients with NS and no known mutation for PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, MEK1, MEK2, RAF1, BRAF, and SHOC2. The c.179G>A (p.G60E) mutation was identified in two patients with typical NS, confirming that NRAS germline mutations are a rare cause of this syndrome. We also screened our cohort of 95 patients with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Among 17 patients with NRAS-mutated JMML, none had clinical features suggestive of NS. None of the 11 JMML patients for which germline DNA was available had a constitutional NRAS mutation.

30417923
Dermatological manifestations in Noonan syndrome: a prospective multicentric study of 129 patients positive for mutation
Background:
        
      
      Data on dermatological manifestations of Noonan syndrome (NS) remain heterogeneous and are based on limited dermatological expertise.

27577878
Primary immunodeficiency diseases: Genomic approaches delineate heterogeneous Mendelian disorders
Background:
        
      
      Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDDs) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders thus far associated with mutations in more than 300 genes. The clinical phenotypes derived from distinct genotypes can overlap. Genetic etiology can be a prognostic indicator of disease severity and can influence treatment decisions.

27121310
NRAS germline variant G138R and multiple rare somatic mutations on APC in colorectal cancer patients in Taiwan by next generation sequencing
Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from mutations in a subset of genes. We investigated the germline and somatic mutation spectrum of patients with CRC in Taiwan by using the AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel V2. Fifty paired freshly frozen stage 0-IV CRC tumors and adjacent normal tissue were collected. Blood DNA from 20 healthy donors were used for comparison of germline mutations. Variants were identified using an ion-torrent personal genomic machine and subsequently confirmed by Sanger sequencing or pyrosequencing. Five nonsynonymous germline variants on 4 cancer susceptible genes, CDH1, APC, MLH1, and NRAS, were observed in 6 patients with CRC (12%). Among them, oncogene NRAS G138R variant was identified as having a predicted damaging effect on protein function, which has never been reported by other laboratories. CDH1 T340A variants were presented in 3 patients. The germline variants in the cancer patients differed completely from those found in asymptomatic controls. Furthermore, a total of 56 COSMIC and 21 novel somatic variants distributed in 20 genes were detected in 44 (88%) of the CRC samples. High inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity levels were observed. Nine rare variants located in the β-catenin binding region of the APC gene were discovered, 7 of which could cause amino acid frameshift and might have a pathogenic effect. In conclusion, panel-based mutation detection by using a high-throughput sequencing platform can elucidate race-dependent cancer genomes. This approach facilitates identifying individuals at high risk and aiding the recognition of novel mutations as targets for drug development.

27561113
1p13.2 deletion displays clinical features overlapping Noonan syndrome, likely related to NRAS gene haploinsufficiency
Deletion-induced hemizygosity may unmask deleterious autosomal recessive variants and be a cause of the phenotypic variability observed in microdeletion syndromes. We performed complete exome sequencing (WES) analysis to examine this possibility in a patient with 1p13.2 microdeletion. Since the patient displayed clinical features suggestive of Noonan Syndrome (NS), we also used WES to rule out the presence of pathogenic variants in any of the genes associated with the different types of NS. We concluded that the clinical findings could be attributed solely to the 1p13.2 haploinsufficiency. Retrospective analysis of other nine reported patients with 1p13.2 microdeletions showed that six of them also presented some characteristics of NS. In all these cases, the deleted segment included the NRAS gene. Gain-of-function mutations of NRAS gene are causally related to NS type 6. Thus, it is conceivable that NRAS haploinsufficiency and gain-of-function mutations may have similar clinical consequences. The same phenomenon has been described for two other genes belonging to the Ras/MAPK pathway: MAP2K2 and SHOC2. In conclusion, we here report genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with chromosome 1p13.2 microdeletions and we propose that NRAS may be a critical gene for the NS characteristics in the patients.

33201365
Dual diagnosis in a child with familial SCN8A-related encephalopathy complicated by a 1p13.2 deletion involving NRAS gene
Keywords:
        
      
      1p13.2 microdeletion syndrome; Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy; NRAS gene; SCN8A gene.

12552559
Comprehensive scanning of the ATM gene with DOVAM-S
Mutation detection at the ATM locus has been difficult because of the large size of the gene (66 exons), the fact that mutations are located throughout the entire gene with no hotspots, and the difficulty of distinguishing mutations from polymorphisms. In this study, the entire coding region (exons 4-65) was scanned, as well as the adjacent intronic regions, using DOVAM-S (Detection Of Virtually All Mutations-SSCP), a robotically-enhanced, multiplexed scanning method that is a highly sensitive modification of SSCP. Forty-three unrelated patients and four obligate carriers were studied. Of the 90 expected mutant alleles, 71 were identified (79%). The mutations included 17 nonsense (24%), 20 frameshift (28%), 20 splice (28%), 10 missense (14%), one in-frame deletion (1%), and three that alter the initiation codon (4%). Among the ataxia-telangiectasia patients, two potentially causative mutations were identified in 30 individuals: 22 had two truncating mutations, four had one truncating and one missense mutation, three had two missense mutations, and one had a truncating mutation and an in-frame deletion of three amino acids. For seven A-T patients and all four obligate carriers, only one truncating mutation was detected. Six of the 43 A-T patients had no detected mutations (14%). Twelve novel mutations and six novel polymorphisms were detected. The results of this complete scan of the ATM coding region showed that 86% of causative ATM mutations were truncating and 14% were missense. DOVAM-S is a rapid, efficient method of performing A-T diagnosis and carrier testing on a clinical time scale.

28779002
Rare, protein-truncating variants in ATM, CHEK2 and PALB2, but not XRCC2, are associated with increased breast cancer risks
Background:
        
      
      Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy in women and has a major heritable component. The risks associated with most rare susceptibility variants are not well estimated. To better characterise the contribution of variants in ATM, CHEK2, PALB2 and XRCC2, we sequenced their coding regions in 13 087 BC cases and 5488 controls from East Anglia, UK.

28767289
Deleterious Germline Mutations in Patients With Apparently Sporadic Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma
Purpose Deleterious germline mutations contribute to pancreatic cancer susceptibility and are well documented in families in which multiple members have had pancreatic cancer. Methods To define the prevalence of these germline mutations in patients with apparently sporadic pancreatic cancer, we sequenced 32 genes, including known pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes, in DNA prepared from normal tissue obtained from 854 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, 288 patients with other pancreatic and periampullary neoplasms, and 51 patients with non-neoplastic diseases who underwent pancreatic resection at Johns Hopkins Hospital between 2000 and 2015. Results Thirty-three (3.9%; 95% CI, 3.0% to 5.8%) of 854 patients with pancreatic cancer had a deleterious germline mutation, 31 (3.5%) of which affected known familial pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes: BRCA2 (12 patients), ATM (10 patients), BRCA1 (3 patients), PALB2 (2 patients), MLH1 (2 patients), CDKN2A (1 patient), and TP53 (1 patient). Patients with these germline mutations were younger than those without (mean ± SD, 60.8 ± 10.6 v 65.1 ± 10.5 years; P = .03). Deleterious germline mutations were also found in BUB1B (1) and BUB3 (1). Only three of these 33 patients had reported a family history of pancreatic cancer, and most did not have a cancer family history to suggest an inherited cancer syndrome. Five (1.7%) of 288 patients with other periampullary neoplasms also had a deleterious germline mutation. Conclusion Germline mutations in pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes are commonly identified in patients with pancreatic cancer without a significant family history of cancer. These deleterious pancreatic cancer susceptibility gene mutations, some of which are therapeutically targetable, will be missed if current family history guidelines are the main criteria used to determine the appropriateness of gene testing.

30549301
Genotype, extrapyramidal features, and severity of variant ataxia-telangiectasia
Objective:
        
      
      Variant ataxia-telangiectasia is caused by mutations that allow some retained ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase activity. Here, we describe the clinical features of the largest established cohort of individuals with variant ataxia-telangiectasia and explore genotype-phenotype correlations.

30303537
Familial breast cancer and DNA repair genes: Insights into known and novel susceptibility genes from the GENESIS study, and implications for multigene panel testing
Pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 only explain the underlying genetic cause of about 10% of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer families. Because of cost-effectiveness, multigene panel testing is often performed even if the clinical utility of testing most of the genes remains questionable. The purpose of our study was to assess the contribution of rare, deleterious-predicted variants in DNA repair genes in familial breast cancer (BC) in a well-characterized and homogeneous population. We analyzed 113 DNA repair genes selected from either an exome sequencing or a candidate gene approach in the GENESIS study, which includes familial BC cases with no BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and having a sister with BC (N = 1,207), and general population controls (N = 1,199). Sequencing data were filtered for rare loss-of-function variants (LoF) and likely deleterious missense variants (MV). We confirmed associations between LoF and MV in PALB2, ATM and CHEK2 and BC occurrence. We also identified for the first time associations between FANCI, MAST1, POLH and RTEL1 and BC susceptibility. Unlike other associated genes, carriers of an ATM LoF had a significantly higher risk of developing BC than carriers of an ATM MV (ORLoF = 17.4 vs. ORMV = 1.6; p Het = 0.002). Hence, our approach allowed us to specify BC relative risks associated with deleterious-predicted variants in PALB2, ATM and CHEK2 and to add MAST1, POLH, RTEL1 and FANCI to the list of DNA repair genes possibly involved in BC susceptibility. We also highlight that different types of variants within the same gene can lead to different risk estimates.

8845835
Predominance of null mutations in ataxia-telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder involving cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, radiosensitivity and cancer predisposition. The responsible gene, ATM, was recently identified by positional cloning and found to encode a putative 350 kDa protein with a Pl 3-kinase-like domain, presumably involved in mediating cell cycle arrest in response to radiation-induced DNA damage. The nature and location of A-T mutations should provide insight into the function of the ATM protein and the molecular basis of this pleiotropic disease. Of 44 A-T mutations identified by us to date, 39 (89%) are expected to inactivate the ATM protein by truncating it, by abolishing correct initiation or termination of translation, or by deleting large segments. Additional mutations are four smaller in-frame deletions and insertions, and one substitution of a highly conserved amino acid at the Pl 3-kinase domain. The emerging profile of mutations causing A-T is thus dominated by those expected to completely inactivate the ATM protein. ATM mutations with milder effects may result in phenotypes related, but not identical, to A-T.

26896183
Longitudinal analysis of the neurological features of ataxia-telangiectasia
Aim:
        
      
      To assess the relationship between genotype and neurological progression in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T).

21665257
Morbidity and mortality from ataxia-telangiectasia are associated with ATM genotype
Background:
        
      
      Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare genetic disease caused by germline biallelic mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) that result in partial or complete loss of ATM expression or activity. The course of the disease is characterized by neurologic manifestations, infections, and cancers.

22146522
Severe reaction to radiotherapy for breast cancer as the presenting feature of ataxia telangiectasia
Background:
        
      
      Severe early and late radiation reaction to radiotherapy is extremely rare in breast cancer patients. Such a reaction prompted an investigation into a 44-year-old mother (patient A-T213).

31050087
Functional classification of ATM variants in ataxia-telangiectasia patients
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM). This disease is characterized by progressive ataxia, telangiectasia, immune deficiency, predisposition to malignancies, and radiosensitivity. However, hypomorphic variants may be discovered associated with very atypical phenotypes, raising the importance of evaluating their pathogenic effects. In this study, multiple functional analyses were performed on lymphoblastoid cell lines from 36 patients, comprising 49 ATM variants, 24 being of uncertain significance. Thirteen patients with atypical phenotype and presumably hypomorphic variants were of particular interest to test strength of functional analyses and to highlight discrepancies with typical patients. Western-blot combined with transcript analyses allowed the identification of one missing variant, confirmed suspected splice defects and revealed unsuspected minor transcripts. Subcellular localization analyses confirmed the low level and abnormal cytoplasmic localization of ATM for most A-T cell lines. Interestingly, atypical patients had lower kinase defect and less altered cell-cycle distribution after genotoxic stress than typical patients. In conclusion, this study demonstrated the pathogenic effects of the 49 variants, highlighted the strength of KAP1 phosphorylation test for pathogenicity assessment and allowed the establishment of the Ataxia-TeLangiectasia Atypical Score to predict atypical phenotype. Altogether, we propose strategies for ATM variant detection and classification.

33646313
Gene Sequencing for Pathogenic Variants Among Adults With Breast and Ovarian Cancer in the Caribbean
Importance:
        
      
      Rates of breast and ovarian cancer are high in the Caribbean; however, to date, few published data quantify the prevalence of inherited cancer in the Caribbean population.

19781682
Rare, evolutionarily unlikely missense substitutions in ATM confer increased risk of breast cancer
The susceptibility gene for ataxia telangiectasia, ATM, is also an intermediate-risk breast-cancer-susceptibility gene. However, the spectrum and frequency distribution of ATM mutations that confer increased risk of breast cancer have been controversial. To assess the contribution of rare variants in this gene to risk of breast cancer, we pooled data from seven published ATM case-control mutation-screening studies, including a total of 1544 breast cancer cases and 1224 controls, with data from our own mutation screening of an additional 987 breast cancer cases and 1021 controls. Using an in silico missense-substitution analysis that provides a ranking of missense substitutions from evolutionarily most likely to least likely, we carried out analyses of protein-truncating variants, splice-junction variants, and rare missense variants. We found marginal evidence that the combination of ATM protein-truncating and splice-junction variants contribute to breast cancer risk. There was stronger evidence that a subset of rare, evolutionarily unlikely missense substitutions confer increased risk. On the basis of subset analyses, we hypothesize that rare missense substitutions falling in and around the FAT, kinase, and FATC domains of the protein may be disproportionately responsible for that risk and that a subset of these may confer higher risk than do protein-truncating variants. We conclude that a comparison between the graded distributions of missense substitutions in cases versus controls can complement analyses of truncating variants and help identify susceptibility genes and that this approach will aid interpretation of the data emerging from new sequencing technologies.

29667044
Germline variants in pancreatic cancer patients with a personal or family history of cancer fulfilling the revised Bethesda guidelines
Background:
        
      
      Pancreatic cancer (PC) is categorized as a neoplasm associated with Lynch syndrome; however, the precise proportion of PC patients harboring DNA mismatch repair genes (MMR genes) remains unclear, especially in the Asian population.

31780696
Germline variants in cancer genes in high-risk non-BRCA patients from Puerto Rico
Inherited pathogenic variants in genes that confer moderate to high risk of breast cancer may explain up to 50% of familial breast cancer. This study aimed at identifying inherited pathogenic variants in breast cancer cases from Puerto Rico that were not linked to BRCA1 or BRCA2. Forty-eight breast cancer patients that met the clinical criteria for BRCA testing but had received a negative BRCA1/2 result were recruited. Fifty-three genes previously implicated in hereditary cancer predisposition were captured using the BROCA Agilent cancer risk panel followed by massively parallel sequencing. Missense variants of uncertain clinical significance in CHEK2 were evaluated using an in vitro kinase assays to determine their impact on function. Pathogenic variants were identified in CHEK2, MUTYH, and RAD51B in four breast cancer patients, which represented 8.3% of the cohort. We identified three rare missense variants of uncertain significance in CHEK2 and two variants (p.Pro484Leu and p.Glu239Lys) showed markedly decreased kinase activity in vitro comparable to a known pathogenic variant. Interestingly, the local ancestry at the RAD51B locus in the carrier of p.Arg47* was predicted to be of African origin. In this cohort, 12.5% of the BRCA-negative breast cancer patients were found to carry a known pathogenic variant or a variant affecting protein activity. This study reveals an unmet clinical need of genetic testing that could benefit a significant proportion of at-risk Latinas. It also highlights the complexity of Hispanic populations as pathogenic factors may originate from any of the ancestral populations that make up their genetic backgrounds.

11756177
ATM gene inactivation in mantle cell lymphoma mainly occurs by truncating mutations and missense mutations involving the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase domain and is associated with increasing numbers of chromosomal imbalances
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene codifies for a protein critically involved in the cellular response to DNA damage. ATM alterations have been observed in some sporadic lymphoproliferative disorders. The recurrent 11q22-23 deletions found in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) suggest that ATM could be inactivated in these lymphomas. In this study, ATM gene alterations and protein expression were examined in 20 and 17 MCL tumor specimens, respectively. Previously, these patients had been examined for p53 and p14(ARF) gene status and analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization. Nine patients had 11q22-23 losses. Eight ATM gene mutations were detected in 7 patients. These alterations were 3 missense mutations in the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K) domain and 5 truncating mutations, including 3 frameshifts, a nonsense mutation, and a substitution of the initial methionine. All truncating mutations were associated with lack of protein expression. Somatic origin was demonstrated in 3 mutations, whereas one mutation was carried heterozygously in the patient germ line. Chromosomal imbalances were significantly higher in typical MCL with ATM inactivation (7.8 +/- 1.3) than in tumors with the wild-type gene (3 +/- 1.1) (P =.001). Moreover, tumors with bi-allelic ATM alteration were associated with 3q gains (P =.015) and frequent extranodal involvement (P =.049). ATM gene alterations were not related to the histologic variant of the tumors, p53/p14(ARF) gene status, survival, or other clinicopathologic features of the patients. These findings indicate that ATM gene mutations in MCL are mainly truncating or missense mutations involving the PI-3K domain, and that may play a role in the pathogenesis of a subset of these tumors with increased numbers of chromosomal imbalances.

26506520
Prevalence of deleterious ATM germline mutations in gastric cancer patients
Besides CDH1, few hereditary gastric cancer predisposition genes have been previously reported. In this study, we discovered two germline ATM mutations (p.Y1203fs and p.N1223S) in a Chinese family with a history of gastric cancer by screening 83 cancer susceptibility genes. Using a published exome sequencing dataset, we found deleterious germline mutations of ATM in 2.7% of 335 gastric cancer patients of different ethnic origins. The frequency of deleterious ATM mutations in gastric cancer patients is significantly higher than that in general population (p=0.0000435), suggesting an association of ATM mutations with gastric cancer predisposition. We also observed biallelic inactivation of ATM in tumors of two gastric cancer patients. Further evaluation of ATM mutations in hereditary gastric cancer will facilitate genetic testing and risk assessment.

33436325
Rare Germline Variants in ATM Predispose to Prostate Cancer: A PRACTICAL Consortium Study
Background:
        
      
      Germline ATM mutations are suggested to contribute to predisposition to prostate cancer (PrCa). Previous studies have had inadequate power to estimate variant effect sizes.

8968760
Ataxia-telangiectasia: founder effect among north African Jews
The ATM gene is responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition. A-T carriers were reported to be moderately cancer-prone. A wide variety of A-T mutations, most of which are unique to single families, were identified in various ethnic groups, precluding carrier screening with mutation-specific assays. However, a single mutation was observed in 32/33 defective ATM alleles in Jewish A-T families of North African origin, coming from various regions of Morocco and Tunisia. This mutation, 103C-->T, results in a stop codon at position 35 of the ATM protein. In keeping with the nature of this mutation, various antibodies directed against the ATM protein failed to defect this protein in patient cells. A rapid carrier detection assay detected this mutation in three out of 488 ATM alleles of Jewish Moroccan or Tunisian origin. This founder effect provides a unique opportunity for population-based screening for A-T carriers in a large Jewish community.

15101044
Functional consequences of ATM sequence variants for chromosomal radiosensitivity
The ATM [for ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) mutated] protein plays a key role in the detection and cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks. Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been described in the ATM gene; however, their association with cancer risk or radiosensitivity remains to be fully established. In this study, the functional consequences of specific ATM SNPs on in vitro radiosensitivity, as assessed by micronuclei (MN) formation, were measured in lymphoblastoid cell lines established from 10 breast cancer (BC) patients carrying different ATM missense SNPs, six A-T patients, six A-T heterozygotes (A-T het), and six normal individuals. The BC, A-T het, and A-T cell line groups showed significantly higher mean levels of MN formation after exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) than did the group containing normal cell lines, with similar levels in the BC and A-T het groups. Within the BC lines studied, the group composed of the six carrying the linked 2572T>C (858F>L) and 3161C>G (1054P>R) variants had a higher level of MN after IR exposure compared to that observed in the remaining four BC or in the normal cell lines. This increase was not related to the constitutive ATM mRNA level, which was similar in these BC and the normal cell lines. Our results indicate that alterations in the ATM gene, including the presence of heterozygous mutations and the 2572C and 3161G variant alleles, are associated with increased in vitro chromosomal radiosensitivity, perhaps by interfering with ATM function in a dominant-negative manner.

17124347
DHPLC screening of ATM gene in Italian patients affected by ataxia-telangiectasia: fourteen novel ATM mutations
The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T:MIM: #208900), ATM, spans about 150 kb of genomic DNA and is composed of 62 coding exons. ATM mutations are found along the entire coding sequence of the gene, without evidence of mutational hot spots. Using DNA as the starting material, we used denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) technique to search for ATM gene mutations. Initially, DHPLC was validated in a retrospective study of 16 positive control samples that included 19 known mutations; 100% of mutations were detected. Subsequently, DHPLC was used to screen for mutations a cohort of 22 patients with the classical form of A-T. A total of 27 different mutations were identified on 38 of the 44 alleles, corresponding to a 86% detection rate. Fourteen of the mutations were novel. In addition, 15 different variants and polymorphisms of unknown functional significance were found. The high incidence of new and individual A-T mutations in our cohort of patients demonstrates marked mutational heterogeneity of A-T in Italy and corroborate the efficiency of DHPLC as a method for the mutation screening of A-T patients.

10864201
ATM protein and p53-serine 15 phosphorylation in ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) patients and at heterozygotes
ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) gene plays a central role in the DNA-damage response pathway. We characterized the ATM protein expression in immortalized cells from AT and AT-variant patients, and heterozygotes and correlated it with two ATM-dependent radiation responses, G1 checkpoint arrest and p53-Ser 15 phosphorylation. On Western blots, the full-length ATM protein was detected in eight of 18 AT cases, albeit at 1-32% of the normal levels, whereas a truncated ATM protein was detected in a single case, despite the prevalence among cases of truncation mutations. Of two ataxia without telangiectasia [A-(T)] cases, one expressed 20% and the other approximately 70% of the normal ATM levels. Noteworthy, among ten asymptomatic heterozygous carriers for AT, normal amounts of ATM protein were found in one and reduced by 40-50% in the remaining cases. The radiation-induced phosphorylation of p53 protein at serine 15, largely mediated by ATM kinase, was defective in AT, A(-T) and in 2/4 heterozygous carriers, while the G1 cell cycle checkpoint was disrupted in all AT and A(-T) cases, and in 3/10 AT heterozygotes. Altogether, our study shows that AT and A(-T) cases bearing truncation mutations of the ATM gene can produce modest amounts of full-length (and only rarely truncated) ATM protein. However, this limited expression of ATM protein provides no benefit regarding the ATM-dependent responses related to G1 arrest and p53-ser15 phosphorylation. Our study additionally shows that the majority of AT heterozygotes express almost halved levels of ATM protein, sufficient in most cases to normally regulate the ATM-dependent DNA damage-response pathway.

31871109
Prevalence of Inherited Mutations in Breast Cancer Predisposition Genes among Women in Uganda and Cameroon
Background:
        
      
      Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has a high proportion of premenopausal hormone receptor negative breast cancer. Previous studies reported a strikingly high prevalence of germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Nigerian patients with breast cancer. It is unknown if this exists in other SSA countries.

10425038
New mutations, polymorphisms, and rare variants in the ATM gene detected by a novel SSCP strategy
The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia, ATM, spans about 150 kb of genomic DNA. ATM mutations are found along the entire gene, with no evidence of a mutational hot spot. Using DNA as the starting material, we screened the ATM gene in 92 A-T patients, using an optimized single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique that detected all previously known mutations in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) segments being analyzed. To expedite screening, we sequentially loaded the SSCP gels with three different sets of PCR products that were pretested to avoid overlapping patterns. Many of the DNA changes we detected were intragenic polymorphisms. Of an expected 177 unknown mutations, we detected approximately 70%, mostly protein truncating mutations (that would have been detectable by protein truncation testing if RNA starting material had been available). Mutations have now been defined for every exon of the ATM gene. Herein, we present 35 new mutations and 34 new intragenic polymorphisms or rare variants within the ATM gene. This is the most comprehensive compilation of ATM polymorphisms assembled to date. Defining polymorphic sites as well as mutations in the ATM gene will be of great importance in designing automated methods for detecting mutations.

11897822
ATM mutations in Finnish breast cancer patients


15042666
A Ser49Cys variant in the ataxia telangiectasia, mutated, gene that is more common in patients with breast carcinoma compared with population controls
Background:
        
      
      Mothers of children who have ataxia telangiectasia have been reported to be at increased risk for development of breast carcinoma. To test whether sequence variants in the ataxia telangiectasia, mutated, gene (ATM) are associated with breast carcinoma, the authors compared the frequency of ATM cDNA sequence changes in patients with breast carcinoma with the corresponding frequency in control patients.

31206626
Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in PALB2, CHEK2, and other known breast cancer susceptibility genes among 1054 BRCA-negative Hispanics with breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer and related cause of mortality among Hispanics, yet susceptibility has been understudied. BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA) mutations explain less than one-half of hereditary BC, and the proportion associated with other BC susceptibility genes is unknown.

10817650
Mutations at the ataxia-telangiectasia locus and clinical phenotypes of A-T patients
Mutations at the ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) locus on chromosome band 11q22 cause a distinctive autosomal recessive syndrome in homozygotes and predispose heterozygotes to cancer, ischemic heart disease, and early mortality. PCR amplification from genomic DNA and automated sequencing of the entire coding region (66 exons) and splice junctions detected 77 mutations (85%) in 90 A-T chromosomes. Heteroduplex analysis detected another 42 mutations at the A-T locus. Out of a total of 71 unique mutations, 50 were found only in a single family, and 51 had not been reported previously. Most (58/71, 82%) mutations were frameshift and nonsense mutations that are predicted to cause truncation of the A-T protein; the less common mutation types were missense (9/71, 13%), splicing (3/71, 4%) and one in-frame deletion, 2546 3 (1/71, 1%). The mean survival and height distribution of 134 A-T patients correlated significantly with the specific mutations present in the patients. Patients homozygous for a single truncating mutation, typically near the N-terminal end of the gene, or heterozygous for the in-frame deletion 2546 3, were shorter and had significantly shorter survival than those heterozygous for a splice site or missense mutation, or heterozygous for two truncating mutations. Alterations of the length or amino acid composition of the A-T gene product affect the A-T clinical phenotype in different ways. Mutation analysis at the A-T locus may help estimate the prognosis of A-T patients.

22585167
ATM mutations in patients with hereditary pancreatic cancer
Pancreatic cancers are the fourth most-common cause of cancer-related deaths in the Western world, with >200,000 cases reported in 2010. Although up to 10% of these cases occur in familial patterns, the hereditary basis for predisposition in the vast majority of affected families is unknown. We used next-generation sequencing, including whole-genome and whole-exome analyses, and identified heterozygous, constitutional, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutations in 2 kindreds with familial pancreatic cancer. Mutations segregated with disease in both kindreds and tumor analysis demonstrated LOH of the wild-type allele. By using sequence analysis of an additional 166 familial pancreatic cancer probands, we identified 4 additional patients with deleterious mutations in the ATM gene, whereas we identified no deleterious mutations in 190 spouse controls (P = 0.046). When we considered only the mostly severely affected families with 3 or more pancreatic cancer cases, 4 deleterious mutations were found in 87 families (P = 0.009). Our results indicate that inherited ATM mutations play an important role in familial pancreatic cancer predisposition.

24512911
Germline mutations in oncogene-induced senescence pathways are associated with multiple sessile serrated adenomas
Background & aims:
        
      
      Little is known about the genetic factors that contribute to the development of sessile serrated adenomas (SSAs). SSAs contain somatic mutations in BRAF or KRAS early in development. However, evidence from humans and mouse models indicates that these mutations result in oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) of intestinal crypt cells. Progression to serrated neoplasia requires cells to escape OIS via inactivation of tumor suppressor pathways. We investigated whether subjects with multiple SSAs carry germline loss-of function mutations (nonsense and splice site) in genes that regulate OIS: the p16-Rb and ATM-ATR DNA damage response pathways.

29909963
Comprehensive Cancer-Predisposition Gene Testing in an Adult Multiple Primary Tumor Series Shows a Broad Range of Deleterious Variants and Atypical Tumor Phenotypes
Multiple primary tumors (MPTs) affect a substantial proportion of cancer survivors and can result from various causes, including inherited predisposition. Currently, germline genetic testing of MPT-affected individuals for variants in cancer-predisposition genes (CPGs) is mostly targeted by tumor type. We ascertained pre-assessed MPT individuals (with at least two primary tumors by age 60 years or at least three by 70 years) from genetics centers and performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on 460 individuals from 440 families. Despite previous negative genetic assessment and molecular investigations, pathogenic variants in moderate- and high-risk CPGs were detected in 67/440 (15.2%) probands. WGS detected variants that would not be (or were not) detected by targeted resequencing strategies, including low-frequency structural variants (6/440 [1.4%] probands). In most individuals with a germline variant assessed as pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP), at least one of their tumor types was characteristic of variants in the relevant CPG. However, in 29 probands (42.2% of those with a P/LP variant), the tumor phenotype appeared discordant. The frequency of individuals with truncating or splice-site CPG variants and at least one discordant tumor type was significantly higher than in a control population (χ2 = 43.642; p ≤ 0.0001). 2/67 (3%) probands with P/LP variants had evidence of multiple inherited neoplasia allele syndrome (MINAS) with deleterious variants in two CPGs. Together with variant detection rates from a previous series of similarly ascertained MPT-affected individuals, the present results suggest that first-line comprehensive CPG analysis in an MPT cohort referred to clinical genetics services would detect a deleterious variant in about a third of individuals.

34573280
Targeted NGS Yields Plentiful Ultra-Rare Variants in Inborn Errors of Immunity Patients
Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) include a large group of inherited diseases sharing either poor, dysregulated, or absent and/or acquired function in one or more components of the immune system. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has driven a rapid increase in the recognition of such defects, though the wide heterogeneity of genetically diverse but phenotypically overlapping diseases has often prevented the molecular characterization of the most complex patients. Two hundred and seventy-two patients were submitted to three successive NGS-based gene panels composed of 58, 146, and 312 genes. Along with pathogenic and likely pathogenic causative gene variants, accounting for the corresponding disorders (37/272 patients, 13.6%), a number of either rare (probably) damaging variants in genes unrelated to patients' phenotype, variants of unknown significance (VUS) in genes consistent with their clinics, or apparently inconsistent benign, likely benign, or VUS variants were also detected. Finally, a remarkable amount of yet unreported variants of unknown significance were also found, often recurring in our dataset. The NGS approach demonstrated an expected IEI diagnostic rate. However, defining the appropriate list of genes for these panels may not be straightforward, and the application of unbiased approaches should be taken into consideration, especially when patients show atypical clinical pictures.

30651582
Germline mutations in cancer susceptibility genes in high grade serous ovarian cancer in Serbia
Clinical criteria for genetic testing of genes other than BRCA1/2 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) still do not exist. We assessed the frequency and predictors of deleterious mutations in 19 cancer predisposition genes in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) in Serbia. Next-generation sequencing was used to identify germline mutations in the whole coding regions of a gene panel. Patients' characteristics and sequencing data were summarized with descriptive statistics and compared using chi-square test. Among 131 HGSOC patients, 23 had BRCA1 (17.6%) while 5 had BRCA2 (3.8%) mutation. In addition, 9 (6.9%) pathogenic mutations were detected in other genes including BRIP1 (n = 2;1.5%), CHEK2 (n = 2;1.5%), NBN (n = 3;2.3%) and RAD51C (n = 2;1.5%). Factors that predicted for BRCA1/2 mutations were: breast and ovarian cancers in the same patient (p = 0.031), young age of EOC (p = 0.029), menstrual status (p = 0.004) and family history of cancer (p < 0.0001). However, these factors did not predict for mutations in other cancer susceptibility genes. Applying established referral criteria for genetic testing in Serbia will help identify BRCA1/2 mutation carriers but will not help identify mutations in other cancer susceptibility genes. Until better predictors emerge we should be performing wider genetic testing of EOC in order to identify all mutation carriers.

30262796
Comprehensive Analysis of Germline Variants in Mexican Patients with Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Susceptibility
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) represents 5⁻10% of all patients with breast cancer and is associated with high-risk pathogenic alleles in BRCA1/2 genes, but only for 25% of cases. We aimed to find new pathogenic alleles in a panel of 143 cancer-predisposing genes in 300 Mexican cancer patients with suspicion of HBOC and 27 high-risk patients with a severe family history of cancer, using massive parallel sequencing. We found pathogenic variants in 23 genes, including BRCA1/2. In the group of cancer patients 15% (46/300) had a pathogenic variant; 11% (33/300) harbored variants with unknown clinical significance (VUS) and 74% (221/300) were negative. The high-risk group had 22% (6/27) of patients with pathogenic variants, 4% (1/27) had VUS and 74% (20/27) were negative. The most recurrent mutations were the Mexican founder deletion of exons 9-12 and the variant p.G228fs in BRCA1, each found in 5 of 17 patients with alterations in this gene. Rare VUS with potential impact at the protein level were found in 21 genes. Our results show for the first time in the Mexican population a higher contribution of pathogenic alleles in other susceptibility cancer genes (54%) than in BRCA1/2 (46%), highlighting the high locus heterogeneity of HBOC and the necessity of expanding genetic tests for this disease to include broader gene panels.

31429931
Whole exome and targeted gene sequencing to detect pathogenic recessive variants in early onset cerebellar ataxia
Over 100 genetically distinct causal known loci for hereditary ataxia phenotype poses a challenge for diagnostic work-up for ataxia patients in a clinically relevant time and precision. In the present study using next-generation sequencing, we have investigated pathogenic variants in early-onset cerebellar ataxia cases using whole exome sequencing in singleton/family-designed and targeted gene-panel sequencing. A total of 98 index patients were clinically and genetically (whole exome sequencing (WES) in 16 patients and targeted gene panel of 41 ataxia causing genes in 82 patients) evaluated. Four families underwent WES in family based design. Overall, we have identified 24 variants comprising 20 pathogenic and four likely-pathogenic both rare/novel, variations in 21 early onset cerebellar ataxia patients. Among the identified variations, SACS (n = 7) and SETX (n = 6) were frequent, while ATM (n = 2), TTPA (n = 2) and other rare loci were observed. We have prioritized novel pathogenic variants in RARS2 and FA2H loci through family based design in two out of four families.

25122203
The pleiotropic movement disorders phenotype of adult ataxia-telangiectasia
Objective:
        
      
      To assess the clinical spectrum of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) in adults, with a focus on movement disorders.

28580595
Mutation screening of 10 cancer susceptibility genes in unselected breast cancer patients
Variants of cancer susceptibility genes other than BRCA1/2 have been proved to be associated with increased risks of breast cancer. This study was performed to investigate the spectrum and prevalence of mutations in 10 cancer susceptibility genes in paired tumor/normal tissues of 292 unselected Chinese breast cancer patients. We performed an analysis of germline and somatic variants in ATM, CDH1, CHEK2, ESR1, GATA3, MAP3K1, MSH2, PALB2, RB1 and STK11 genes by integrating microfluidic PCR-based target enrichment and next-generation sequencing technologies. In total, 3 germline and 25 somatic deleterious mutations were found among 27 patients (9.25%), and 17 of them were novel mutations. Most deleterious mutations were prevalent in luminal A invasive breast cancer (P = .014). We also observed 83 variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in 100 patients (34.25%), 23 of which were predicted to be deleterious by in silico prediction programs (MetaSVM and MetaLR). VUS carriers had higher positive rate of lymph node metastasis than non-carriers (P = .008) and were predominantly present in ER+ tumors (P = .018). Our findings would enhance the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of breast cancer in Chinese population.

28652578
Rare germline variants in ATM are associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemia


26098866
Loss-of-function variants in ATM confer risk of gastric cancer
Gastric cancer is a serious health problem worldwide, with particularly high prevalence in eastern Asia. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in Asian populations have identified several loci that associate with gastric cancer risk. Here we report a GWAS of gastric cancer in a European population, using information on 2,500 population-based gastric cancer cases and 205,652 controls. We found a new gastric cancer association with loss-of-function mutations in ATM (gene test, P = 8.0 × 10(-12); odds ratio (OR) = 4.74). The combination of the loss-of-function variants p.Gln852*, p.Ser644* and p.Tyr103* (combined minor allele frequency (MAF) = 0.3%) also associates with pancreatic and prostate cancers (OR = 3.81 and 2.18, respectively) and gives an indication of risk of breast and colorectal cancers (OR = 1.82 and 1.97, respectively). Cancers in those carrying loss-of-function ATM mutations are diagnosed at a significantly earlier age than in non-carriers. Our results confirm an association between gastric cancer in Europeans and three loci previously reported in Asians, MUC1, PRKAA1 and PSCA, refine the association signal at PRKAA1 and support a pathogenic role for the tandem repeat identified in MUC1.

12673797
Designing and implementing quality control for multi-center screening of mutations in the ATM gene among women with breast cancer
Epidemiologic studies of breast and other cancers are increasingly turning toward large, multi-center designs in order to obtain adequate power to detect low-penetrance susceptibility alleles. The size of such studies often makes it necessary to distribute the genetic screening efforts to multiple sites. Careful standardization of screening methodology and quality control across sites is required for such multi-center screening designs to be efficient. In this report, we illustrate our approach to these challenges in the context of the WECARE (Women's Environment, Cancer and Radiation Epidemiology) Study, a multi-center population-based genetic epidemiologic study of women with unilateral and bilateral breast cancer. We provide optimized conditions for screening the ataxia-telangiectasia gene (ATM) for variation by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and describe the results of two independent quality control studies at four international centers employing these conditions. Finally, we report novel mutations in the ATM gene identified both in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia and in patients with unilateral or bilateral breast cancer.

16941484
ATM mutations in Italian families with ataxia telangiectasia include two distinct large genomic deletions
In patients affected by Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T), mutations in the ATM gene lead to loss-of-function alleles. Nonsense, splice-site variants, small insertions or deletions (frameshifts) and missense are the most commonly found mutations. Large genomic deletions (LGDs) are rare (approximately 1%) but can lead to the same phenotype. In compound heterozygotes, deletions are not detected by most screening strategies. We analysed the ATM gene in 12 unrelated Italian A-T patients and identified all 24 mutated alleles. Twelve mutations were novel. Standardized SNP and STR haplotyping followed by DHPLC screening of genomic DNA, allowed all but three mutations to be detected (approximately 87.5%). The remaining mutations required RT-PCR analysis of ATM transcript and Southern blotting of genomic DNA. We found three LGDs: one of 8.5 and two identical of 18 kb spanning exons 32-36 and 21-29, respectively. The breakpoints of these deletions were sequenced in an attempt to understand the mechanisms of mutations; both deletions involved regions rich in repeated elements.

33095795
Screening of targeted panel genes in Brazilian patients with primary ovarian insufficiency
Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a heterogeneous disorder associated with several genes. The majority of cases are still unsolved. Our aim was to identify the molecular diagnosis of a Brazilian cohort with POI. Genetic analysis was performed using a customized panel of targeted massively parallel sequencing (TMPS) and the candidate variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Additional copy number variation (CNV) analysis of TMPS samples was performed by CONTRA. Fifty women with POI (29 primary amenorrhea and 21 secondary amenorrhea) of unknown molecular diagnosis were included in this study, which was conducted in a tertiary referral center of clinical endocrinology. A genetic defect was obtained in 70% women with POI using the customized TMPS panel. Twenty-four pathogenic variants and two CNVs were found in 48% of POI women. Of these variants, 16 genes were identified as BMP8B, CPEB1, INSL3, MCM9, GDF9, UBR2, ATM, STAG3, BMP15, BMPR2, DAZL, PRDM1, FSHR, EIF4ENIF1, NOBOX, and GATA4. Moreover, a microdeletion and microduplication in the CPEB1 and SYCE1 genes, respectively, were also identified in two distinct patients. The genetic analysis of eleven patients was classified as variants of uncertain clinical significance whereas this group of patients harbored at least two variants in different genes. Thirteen patients had benign or no rare variants, and therefore the genetic etiology remained unclear. In conclusion, next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a highly effective approach to identify the genetic diagnoses of heterogenous disorders, such as POI. A molecular etiology allowed us to improve the disease knowledge, guide decisions about prevention or treatment, and allow familial counseling avoiding future comorbidities.

27083775
Germline Analysis from Tumor-Germline Sequencing Dyads to Identify Clinically Actionable Secondary Findings
Purpose:
        
      
      To evaluate germline variants in hereditary cancer susceptibility genes among unselected cancer patients undergoing tumor-germline sequencing.

32521533
Pathogenic Germline Mutations in Chinese Patients with Gastric Cancer Identified by Next-Generation Sequencing
Background:
        
      
      Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in China, while the nature of genetic factors related to GC has not been well-studied.

15880721
ATM mutations, haplotype analysis, and immunological status of Russian patients with ataxia telangiectasia
Mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder, ataxia telangiectasia (A-T). Mutations in different ethnic groups are distributed along the entire length of the large, 66 exon ATM gene. In this study, A-T patients from 16 Russian families were assessed for immunological status and ATM haplotype analysis, and screened for ATM mutations. Haplotype analysis was performed to enhance the efficiency of mutation detection. Mutations predicted to cause disease were identified in 19 of 32 alleles (59%), including a truncating mutation (c.5932G>T) that was identified in 8/32 (25%) alleles both by haplotype analysis and mutation screening. This mutation has been found in low abundance in other European A-T cohorts suggesting that this founder-effect mutation may be of Russian origin. The abundance of this mutation may allow for large-scale screening of cancer patients to help clarify the role of ATM in breast and other cancers. Nine of the remaining mutations were previously unreported, and add to the multitude of unique mutations found throughout the gene.

17517479
Possession of ATM sequence variants as predictor for late normal tissue responses in breast cancer patients treated with radiotherapy
Purpose:
        
      
      The ATM gene product is a central component of cell cycle regulation and genomic surveillance. We hypothesized that DNA sequence alterations in ATM predict for adverse effects after external beam radiotherapy for early breast cancer.

12552566
Phenotypic cellular characterization of an ataxia telangiectasia patient carrying a causal homozygous missense mutation
Most disease-causing mutations in Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) patients correspond to truncating mutations in the ATM gene with very few cases of AT patients carrying two missense sequence alterations being reported. The cellular phenotype of a lymphoblastoid cell line established from an AT patient (AT173) who showed classical clinical AT features, and carried two homozygous missense alterations, the 378T>A variant and 9022C>T located within the ATM kinase domain, has been characterized. ATM mRNA was detectable and the ATM protein level was approximately 50% of that seen in normal cell lines. Functional analysis of this protein revealed a total absence of ATM kinase activity measured either in vitro or in vivo, before and after exposure to ionizing radiation. The AT173 cell line was hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and exhibited a G1 cell cycle arrest defect and an accumulation of cells in G2 phase of the cell cycle after irradiation, a response that is identical to that seen in AT cell lines carrying truncating mutations. These phenotypic features strongly suggest that the 9022C>T (R3008C) missense mutation is the disease-causing mutation and that the presence of ATM protein is not always predictive of a normal cellular phenotype.

18502988
ATM gene variants in patients with idiopathic perifoveal telangiectasia
Purpose:
        
      
      To investigate the prevalence of sequence variants in the ATM gene and to determine the frequency of major age-related macular degeneration (AMD)-associated variants in CFH, CFB, and 10q26 loci in patients with idiopathic perifoveal telangiectasia (IPT).

25614872
Ten new ATM alterations in Polish patients with ataxia-telangiectasia
Inherited biallelic mutations of the ATM gene are responsible for the development of ataxia telangiectasia (AT). The objective of the present study was to conduct molecular analysis of the ATM gene in a cohort of 24 Polish patients with ataxia-telangiectasia with aim being to provide an updated mutational spectrum in Polish AT patients. As a result of molecular analysis, the status of recurrent mutation was confirmed and ten new ATM variants were detected. Application of MLPA analysis allowed the detection of large genomic deletion. Previously, this type of mutation had never been seen in our population. Finally, in silico analysis was carried out for newly detected ATM alterations. In addition, functional analysis was performed to evaluate the effects of intronic variants: c.3402+30_3402+32delATC.

28849312
Molecular diversity of combined and complex dystonia: insights from diagnostic exome sequencing
Combined and complex dystonias are heterogeneous movement disorders combining dystonia with other motor and/or systemic signs. Although we are beginning to understand the diverse molecular causes of these disease entities, clinical pattern recognition and conventional genetic workup achieve an etiological diagnosis only in a minority of cases. Our goal was to provide a window into the variable genetic origins and distinct clinical patterns of combined/complex dystonia more broadly. Between August 2016 and January 2017, we applied whole-exome sequencing to a cohort of nine patients with varied combined and/or complex dystonic presentations, being on a diagnostic odyssey. Bioinformatics analyses, co-segregation studies, and sequence-interpretation algorithms were employed to detect causative mutations. Comprehensive clinical review was undertaken to define the phenotypic spectra and optimal management strategies. On average, we observed a delay in diagnosis of 23 years before whole-exome analysis enabled determination of each patient's genetic defect. Whereas mutations in ACTB, ATP1A3, ADCY5, and SGCE were associated with particular phenotypic clues, trait manifestations arising from mutations in PINK1, MRE11A, KMT2B, ATM, and SLC6A1 were different from those previously reported in association with these genes. Apart from improving counseling for our entire cohort, genetic findings had actionable consequences on preventative measures and therapeutic interventions for five patients. Our investigation confirms unique genetic diagnoses, highlights key clinical features and phenotypic expansions, and suggests whole-exome sequencing as a first-tier diagnostic for combined/complex dystonia. These results might stimulate independent teams to extend the scope of agnostic genetic screening to this particular phenotypic group that remains poorly characterized through existing studies.

33098801
Monogenic variants in dystonia: an exome-wide sequencing study
Background:
        
      
      Dystonia is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous condition that occurs in isolation (isolated dystonia), in combination with other movement disorders (combined dystonia), or in the context of multisymptomatic phenotypes (isolated or combined dystonia with other neurological involvement). However, our understanding of its aetiology is still incomplete. We aimed to elucidate the monogenic causes for the major clinical categories of dystonia.

12810666
Contributions of ATM mutations to familial breast and ovarian cancer
This study addresses the prevalence of ATM mutations and the association with breast cancer in Austrian families selected for a history of breast or ovarian cancer or both [hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC)]. In 270 HBOC families previously screened for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, 137 different sequence alterations of ATM were identified. Seven of these were mutations presumed to cause ataxia telangiectasia based on their effect on the ATM protein, including five that caused a protein truncation and two missense mutations in the catalytic kinase domain of the highly conserved COOH terminus of the protein. The seven mutations were found in 10 families (3.7%). In addition, one missense variant, L1420F, was observed in 13 HBOC families (4.8%) but was not observed in any of the 122 healthy volunteers with no history of breast cancer. In addition, the variant segregated with breast cancer in some of the families, suggesting that it may be pathogenic for breast cancer. Sixty-two additional variants of potential significance were observed in 65 HBOC families, but not in healthy controls. These variants included 24 sequence alterations with possible effects on splicing or protein-protein interactions. This study indicates that there is a significant prevalence of ATM mutations in breast and ovarian cancer families and adds to a growing body of evidence that ATM mutations confer increased susceptibility to breast cancer.

30607632
Prevalence and characterization of ATM germline mutations in Chinese BRCA1/2-negative breast cancer patients
Purpose:
        
      
      The ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene is a moderate susceptibility gene for breast cancer. However, little is known about the breast cancer phenotypes associated with ATM mutation. We therefore investigated the spectrum and clinical characteristics of ATM germline mutations in Chinese breast cancer patients.

24954719
Myoclonic axial jerks for diagnosing atypical evolution of ataxia telangiectasia
Background:
        
      
      Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a common inherited cause of early childhood-onset ataxia, distinguished by progressive cerebellum malfunction, capillary vessel extension, and immunodeficiency. The diagnosis of A-T is sometimes difficult to establish in patients with atypical clinical evolution.

29371908
Genetic variants of prospectively demonstrated phenocopies in BRCA1/2 kindreds
Background:
        
      
      In kindreds carrying path_BRCA1/2 variants, some women in these families will develop cancer despite testing negative for the family's pathogenic variant. These families may have additional genetic variants, which not only may increase the susceptibility of the families' path_BRCA1/2, but also be capable of causing cancer in the absence of the path_BRCA1/2 variants. We aimed to identify novel genetic variants in prospectively detected breast cancer (BC) or gynecological cancer cases tested negative for their families' pathogenic BRCA1/2 variant (path_BRCA1 or path_BRCA2).

32853339
Germline Sequencing DNA Repair Genes in 5545 Men With Aggressive and Nonaggressive Prostate Cancer
Background:
        
      
      There is an urgent need to identify factors specifically associated with aggressive prostate cancer (PCa) risk. We investigated whether rare pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or deleterious (P/LP/D) germline variants in DNA repair genes are associated with aggressive PCa risk in a case-case study of aggressive vs nonaggressive disease.

9600235
Mutations of the ATM gene detected in Japanese ataxia-telangiectasia patients: possible preponderance of the two founder mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5
The ATM (A-T, mutated) gene on human chromosome 11q22.3 has recently been identified as the gene responsible for the human recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In order to define the types of disease-causing ATM mutations in Japanese A-T patients as well as to look for possible mutational hotspots, reverse-transcribed RNA derived from ten patients belonging to eight unrelated Japanese A-T families was analyzed for mutations by the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting method. As has been reported by others, mutations that lead to exon skipping or premature protein truncation were also predominant in our mutants. Six different mutations were identified on 12 of the 16 alleles examined. Four were deletions involving a loss of a single exon: exon 7, exon 16, exon 33 or exon 35. The others were minute deletions, 4649delA in exon 33 and 7883del5 in exon 55. The mutations 4612del165 and 7883del5 were found in more than two unrelated families; 44% (7 of 16) of the mutant alleles had one of the two mutations. The 4612del165 mutations in three different families were all ascribed to the same T-->A substitution at the splice donor site in intron 33. Microsatellite genotyping around the ATM locus also indicated that a common haplotype was shared by the mutant alleles in both mutations. This suggests that these two founder mutations may be predominant among Japanese ATM mutant alleles.

30772474
ATM mutation spectrum in Russian children with ataxia-telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a severe autosomal recessive orphan disease characterized by a number of peculiar clinical manifestations. Genetic diagnosis of AT is complicated due to a large size of the causative gene, ATM. We used next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology for the ATM analysis in 17 children with the clinical diagnosis of AT. Biallelic mutations in the ATM gene were identified in all studied subjects; these lesions included one large gene rearrangement, which was reliably detected by NGS and validated by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). There was a pronounced founder effect, as 17 of 30 (57%) pathogenic ATM alleles in the patients of Slavic origin were represented by three recurrent mutations (c.5932G > T, c.450_453delTTCT, and c.1564_1565delGA). These data have to be taken into account while considering the genetic diagnosis and screening for ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome.

9887333
Characterization of ATM gene mutations in 66 ataxia telangiectasia families
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by neurological and immunological symptoms, radiosensitivity and cancer predisposition. The gene mutated in AT, designated the ATM gene, encodes a large protein kinase with a PI-3 kinase-related domain. In this study, we investigated the mutational spectrum of the ATM gene in a cohort of AT patients living in Germany. We amplified and sequenced all 66 exons and the flanking untranslated regions from genomic DNA of 66 unrelated AT patients. We identified 46 different ATM mutations and 26 sequence polymorphisms and variants scattered throughout the gene. A total of 34 mutations have not been described in other populations. Seven mutations occurred in more than one family, but none of these accounted for more than five alleles in our patient group. The majority of the mutations were truncating, confirming that the absence of full-length ATM protein is the most common molecular basis of AT. Transcript analyses demonstrated single exon skipping as the consequence of most splice site substitutions, but a more complex pattern was observed for two mutations. Immunoblot studies of cell lines carrying ATM missense substitutions or in-frame deletions detected residual ATM protein in four cases. One of these mutations, a valine deletion proximal to the kinase domain, resulted in ATM protein levels >20% of normal in an AT lymphoblastoid cell line. In summary, our results survey and characterize a plethora of variations in the ATM gene identified by exon scanning sequencing and indicate a high diversity of mutations giving rise to AT in a non-isolated population.

16411093
Exclusion/confirmation of ataxia-telangiectasia via cell-cycle testing
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder with increased radiosensitivity and cancer susceptibility. The responsible gene (ATM) consists of 66 exons and a coding region of 9171 bp which precludes direct sequencing as a screening assay for confirmation or exclusion of the clinical suspicion of AT. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 330 patients referred for the exclusion of AT were exposed to ionizing radiation (IR) and incubated for 72 h in the presence of phytohemagglutinin. Using bivariate BrdU-Hoechst/ethidium bromide flowcytometry, the following cell cycle parameters were ascertained: (1) proportion of non-proliferating (G0,G1) cells as a measure of mitogen response, (2) proportion of first-cycle G2-phase cells relative to the growth fraction (G2/GF) as a measure of radiosensitivity. Of the cases tested, 94.2% could be unequivocally assigned either to the AT-negative or the AT-positive group of patients. Of the AT-positive cases, 11 were confirmed by ATM mutation analysis. Nineteen cases presented with non-conclusive results, mostly due to poor mitogen response; however, a combination of cell-cycle data with serum AFP concentrations led to the exclusion of AT in all but two of the uncertain cases. Substitution of ionizing radiation by the radiomimetic bleomycin was additionally tested in a small series of patients. We conclude that cell-cycle testing complemented by serum AFP measurements fulfills the criteria as a rapid and economical screening procedure for the differential diagnosis of juvenile ataxias.

12935922
ATM missense mutations are frequent in patients with breast cancer
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T), an autosomal recessive neuro-immunologic disease with cancer susceptibility, results from ATM gene mutations. Most mutations in A-T patients cause protein truncation. Epidemiologic evidence suggests that ATM gene mutation carriers may be at increased risk for breast cancer, but the protein-truncating mutations that compose the majority of mutations in patients with ataxia telangiectasia are not elevated in women with breast cancer. In this report we present evidence that missense mutations in the ATM gene predispose to breast cancer. The analysis was performed in two phases in a total of 90 women with breast cancer and 90 ethnically similar control individuals. DOVAM-S, a robotically enhanced multiplexed, highly redundant form of SSCP in which virtually all mutations within the input amplicons can be detected, was used to scan all the coding exons and flanking splice junctions. Cohort-specific mutations were significantly elevated in women with breast cancer in phase 1 (43 cases) and phase 2 (47 cases). For the 90 patients and 90 controls, total missense mutations were significantly elevated in cases [OR=2.0; 90% CI=1.01-4.15]. Cohort-specific missense variants displayed an odds ratio of 4.0 (90% CI=1.37-13.5). It is estimated that the attributable risk of mutations in the ATM gene is 13% in this cohort of women with breast cancer.

17341484
Counting potentially functional variants in BRCA1, BRCA2 and ATM predicts breast cancer susceptibility
Rare inactivating mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, TP53 and CHEK2 confer relative risks for breast cancer between about 2 and more than 10, but more common variants in these genes are generally considered of little or no clinical significance. Under the polygenic model for breast cancer carriers of multiple low-penetrance alleles are at high risk, but few such alleles have been reliably identified. We analysed 1037 potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in candidate cancer genes in 473 women with two primary breast cancers and 2463 controls. Twenty-five of these SNPs were in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, TP53 and CHEK2. Among the 1037 SNPs there were a few significant findings, but hardly more than would be expected in this large experiment. There was, however, a significant trend in risk with increasing numbers of variant alleles for the 25 SNPs in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, TP53 and CHEK2 (P(trend) = 0.005). For the 21 of these with minor allele frequency <10% this trend was highly significant (P(trend) = 0.00004, odds ratio for 3 or more SNPs = 2.90, 95% CI 1.69-4.97). The individual effects of most of these risk alleles were undetectably small even in this well powered study, but the risk conferred by multiple variants is readily detectable and makes a substantial contribution to susceptibility. A risk score incorporating a suitably weighted sum of all potentially functional variants in these and a few other candidate genes may provide clinically useful identification of women at high genetic risk.

22529920
Computational refinement of functional single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with ATM gene
Background:
        
      
      Understanding and predicting molecular basis of disease is one of the major challenges in modern biology and medicine. SNPs associated with complex disorders can create, destroy, or modify protein coding sites. Single amino acid substitutions in the ATM gene are the most common forms of genetic variations that account for various forms of cancer. However, the extent to which SNPs interferes with the gene regulation and affects cancer susceptibility remains largely unknown.

23640770
Isolated generalized dystonia in biallelic missense mutations of the ATM gene


18846412
Prominent oromandibular dystonia and pharyngeal telangiectasia in atypical ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) typically presents with early-onset progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculomotor apraxia and later, oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia. Extrapyramidal symptoms, apart from chorea, are rare. In this paper, we report a case of A-T with an atypically mild and slowly progressive disease course. Although by history there was mild gait clumsiness in early childhood, the leading problem was that of dystonia with onset at age 15, in the absence of gross gait imbalance or ocular motor apraxia. Dystonia was generalized and with prominent oromandibular involvement. Unusually, a leash of telangiectasia was present on the posterior pharyngeal wall, while other features frequently associated with A-T were absent.

11505391
Increased frequency of ATM mutations in breast carcinoma patients with early onset disease and positive family history
Background:
        
      
      An increased incidence of breast carcinoma has been reported among relatives of individuals who are affected with the rare recessive disorder, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), and who are heterozygous for mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. However, most studies of breast carcinoma cases from the general population have failed to find a higher incidence of ATM mutations in cases when compared with controls.

16029571
[Research on clinical characteristics and ATM gene mutations in Chinese patients with ataxia-telangiectasia]
Objective:
        
      
      To investigate the clinical manifestation and mutation characteristics of ATM gene in Chinese patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (AT).

32488064
Overwhelming genetic heterogeneity and exhausting molecular diagnostic process in chronic and progressive ataxias: facing it up with an algorithm, a gene, a panel at a time
Ataxias are one of the most frequent complaints in Neurogenetics units worldwide. Currently, more than 50 subtypes of spinocerebellar ataxias and more than 60 recessive ataxias are recognized. We conducted an 11-year prospective, observational, analytical study in order to estimate the frequency of pediatric and adult genetic ataxias in Argentina, to describe the phenotypes of this cohort and evaluate the diagnostic yield of the algorithm used in our unit. We included 334 ataxic patients. Our diagnostic approach was successful in one-third of the cohort. A final molecular diagnosis was reached in 113 subjects. This rate is significantly higher in the subgroup of patients with a positive family history, where the diagnostic yield increased to 55%. The most prevalent dominant and recessive ataxias in Argentina were SCA-2 (36% of dominant ataxias) and FA (62% of recessive ataxias), respectively. Next generation sequencing-based assays were diagnostic in the 65% of the patients requiring these tests. These results provide relevant epidemiological information, bringing a comprehensive knowledge of the most prevalent subtypes of genetic ataxias and their phenotypes in our territory and laying the groundwork for rationally implementing genetic diagnostic programs for these disorders in our country.

33084218
The odyssey of complex neurogenetic disorders: From undetermined to positive
The genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of neurogenetic diseases forces patients and their families into a "diagnostic odyssey." An increase in the variability of genetic disorders and the corresponding gene-disease associations suggest the need to periodically re-evaluate the significance of variants of undetermined pathogenicity. Here, we report the diagnostic and clinical utility of Targeted Gene Panel Sequencing (TGPS) and Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in 341 patients with suspected neurogenetic disorders from centers in Buenos Aires and Cincinnati over the last 4 years, focusing on the usefulness of reinterpreting variants previously classified as of uncertain significance. After a mean of ±2years (IC 95:0.73-3.27), approximately 30% of the variants of uncertain significance were reclassified as pathogenic. The use of next generation sequencing methods has facilitated the identification of both germline and mosaic pathogenic variants, expanding the diagnostic yield. These results demonstrate the high clinical impact of periodic reanalysis of undetermined variants in clinical neurology.

29659569
Targeted next generation sequencing identifies functionally deleterious germline mutations in novel genes in early-onset/familial prostate cancer
Considering that mutations in known prostate cancer (PrCa) predisposition genes, including those responsible for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer and Lynch syndromes, explain less than 5% of early-onset/familial PrCa, we have sequenced 94 genes associated with cancer predisposition using next generation sequencing (NGS) in a series of 121 PrCa patients. We found monoallelic truncating/functionally deleterious mutations in seven genes, including ATM and CHEK2, which have previously been associated with PrCa predisposition, and five new candidate PrCa associated genes involved in cancer predisposing recessive disorders, namely RAD51C, FANCD2, FANCI, CEP57 and RECQL4. Furthermore, using in silico pathogenicity prediction of missense variants among 18 genes associated with breast/ovarian cancer and/or Lynch syndrome, followed by KASP genotyping in 710 healthy controls, we identified "likely pathogenic" missense variants in ATM, BRIP1, CHEK2 and TP53. In conclusion, this study has identified putative PrCa predisposing germline mutations in 14.9% of early-onset/familial PrCa patients. Further data will be necessary to confirm the genetic heterogeneity of inherited PrCa predisposition hinted in this study.

23585524
ATM mutations uniformly lead to ATM dysfunction in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: application of functional test using doxorubicin
ATM abnormalities are frequent in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and represent an important prognostic factor. Sole 11q deletion does not result in ATM inactivation by contrast to biallelic defects involving mutations. Therefore, the analysis of ATM mutations and their functional impact is crucial. In this study, we analyzed ATM mutations in predominantly high-risk patients using: i) resequencing microarray and direct sequencing; ii) Western blot for total ATM level; iii) functional test based on p21 gene induction after parallel treatment of leukemic cells with fludarabine and doxorubicin. ATM dysfunction leads to impaired p21 induction after doxorubicin exposure. We detected ATM mutation in 16% (22 of 140) of patients, and all mutated samples manifested demonstrable ATM defect (impaired p21 upregulation after doxorubicin and/or null protein level). Loss of ATM function in mutated samples was also evidenced through defective p53 pathway activation after ionizing radiation exposure. ATM mutation frequency was 34% in patients with 11q deletion, 4% in the TP53-defected group, and 8% in wild-type patients. Our functional test, convenient for routine use, showed high sensitivity (80%) and specificity (97%) for ATM mutations prediction. Only cells with ATM mutation, but not those with sole 11q deletion, were resistant to doxorubicin. As far as fludarabine is concerned, this difference was not observed. Interestingly, patients from both these groups experienced nearly identical time to first treatment. In conclusion, ATM mutations either alone or in combination with 11q deletion uniformly led to demonstrable ATM dysfunction in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and mutation presence can be predicted by the functional test using doxorubicin.

27978560
Prevalence and Spectrum of Germline Cancer Susceptibility Gene Mutations Among Patients With Early-Onset Colorectal Cancer
Importance:
        
      
      Hereditary cancer syndromes infer high cancer risks and require intensive cancer surveillance, yet the prevalence and spectrum of these conditions among unselected patients with early-onset colorectal cancer (CRC) is largely undetermined.

30613976
Insight into genetic susceptibility to male breast cancer by multigene panel testing: Results from a multicenter study in Italy
Breast cancer (BC) in men is rare and genetic predisposition is likely to play a relevant role in its etiology. Inherited mutations in BRCA1/2 account for about 13% of all cases and additional genes that may contribute to the missing heritability need to be investigated. In our study, a well-characterized series of 523 male BC (MBC) patients from the Italian multicenter study on MBC, enriched for non-BRCA1/2 MBC cases, was screened by a multigene custom panel of 50 cancer-associated genes. The main clinical-pathologic characteristics of MBC in pathogenic variant carriers and non-carriers were also compared. BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants were detected in twenty patients, thus, a total of 503 non-BRCA1/2 MBC patients were examined in our study. Twenty-seven of the non-BRCA1/2 MBC patients were carriers of germline pathogenic variants in other genes, including two APC p.Ile1307Lys variant carriers and one MUTYH biallelic variant carrier. PALB2 was the most frequently altered gene (1.2%) and PALB2 pathogenic variants were significantly associated with high risk of MBC. Non-BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant carriers were more likely to have personal (p = 0.0005) and family (p = 0.007) history of cancer. Results of our study support a central role of PALB2 in MBC susceptibility and show a low impact of CHEK2 on MBC predisposition in the Italian population. Overall, our data indicate that a multigene testing approach may benefit from appropriately selected patients with implications for clinical management and counseling of MBC patients and their family members.

24120321
Myoclonic head jerks and extensor axial dystonia in the variant form of ataxia telangiectasia
Keywords:
        
      
      Ataxia telangiectasia; Dystonia; Myoclonic head jerks.

9711876
ATM mutations in patients with ataxia telangiectasia screened by a hierarchical strategy
ATM has been identified as a gene that is responsible for ataxia telangiectasia (AT), a pleiotropic disorder of autosomal recessive inheritance. While many mutations of this gene in AT patients of various ethnicities have been reported, data on Japanese patients are scarce. In this report, we present the results of a thorough survey of ATM mutations in 14 unrelated AT patients, with an emphasis on Japanese subjects. We used a hierarchical strategy in which we extensively analyzed the entire coding region of the cDNA. In the first stage, point mutations were sought by PCR-SSCP in short patches. In the second and third stages, the products of medium- and long-patch PCR, each covering the entire region, were examined by agarose gel electrophoresis to search for length changes. We found a total of 15 mutations (including 12 new) and 4 polymorphisms. Abnormal splicing of ATM was frequent among Japanese, and no hotspot was obvious, suggesting no strong founder effects in this ethnic group. Eleven patients carried either one homozygous or two compound heterozygous mutations, one patient carried only one detectable heterozygous mutation, and no mutation was found in two patients. Overall, mutations were found in at least 75% of the different ATM alleles examined. Possible reasons for the inability to detect mutations in some patients are discussed.

25186627
Frequency of mutations in individuals with breast cancer referred for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing using next-generation sequencing with a 25-gene panel
Background:
        
      
      Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows for simultaneous sequencing of multiple cancer susceptibility genes and, for an individual, may be more efficient and less expensive than sequential testing. The authors assessed the frequency of deleterious germline mutations among individuals with breast cancer who were referred for BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) gene testing using a panel of 25 genes associated with inherited cancer predisposition.

19404735
ATM germline mutations in women with familial breast cancer and a relative with haematological malignancy
Biallelic inactivation of the ATM gene causes ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a complex neurological disease associated with a high risk of leukaemias and lymphomas. Mothers of A-T children, obligate ATM heterozygote mutation carriers, have a breast cancer (BC) relative risk of about 3. The frequency of ATM carriers in BC women with a BC family history has been estimated to be 2.70%. To further our clinical understanding of familial BC and examine whether haematological malignancies are predictive of ATM germline mutation, we estimated the frequency of heterozygote mutation carriers in a series of 122 BC women with a family history of both BC and haematological malignancy and without BRCA1/2 mutation. The gene screening was performed with a new high throughput method, EMMA (enhanced mismatch mutation analysis). Amongst 28 different ATM variants, eight mutations have been identified in eight patients: two mutations leading to a putative truncated protein and six being likely deleterious mutations. One of the truncating mutations was initially interpreted as a missense mutation, p.Asp2597Tyr, but is actually a splice mutation (c.7789G>T/p.Asp2597_Lys2643>LysfsX3). The estimated frequency of ATM heterozygote mutation carriers in our series is 6.56% (95% CI: 2.16-10.95), a significantly higher figure than that observed in the general population, estimated to be between 0.3 and 0.6%. Although a trend towards an increased frequency of ATM carriers was observed, it was not different from that observed in a population of familial BC women not selected for haematological malignancy as the frequency of ATM carriers was 2.70%, a value situated in the confidence interval of our study.

31382929
Germline and somatic mutations in patients with multiple primary melanomas: a next generation sequencing study
Introduction:
        
      
      Multiple primary melanomas (MPM) occur up to 8% of patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM). They are often sporadic harbouring several somatic mutations, but also familial cases harbouring a CDKN2A germline mutation have been describe in Caucasian populations. The aim of this study was to investigate the incidence, the distribution patterns and the impact of known and unknown germline and somatic mutations in patients with MPM from Italy.

27989354
Germline Mutations in ATM and BRCA1/2 Distinguish Risk for Lethal and Indolent Prostate Cancer and are Associated with Early Age at Death
Background:
        
      
      Germline mutations in BRCA1/2 and ATM have been associated with prostate cancer (PCa) risk.

28916186
Clinical, immunologic, and genetic spectrum of 696 patients with combined immunodeficiency
Background:
        
      
      Combined immunodeficiencies (CIDs) are diseases of defective adaptive immunity with diverse clinical phenotypes. Although CIDs are more prevalent in the Middle East than Western countries, the resources for genetic diagnosis are limited.

31285527
Histomorphology of pancreatic cancer in patients with inherited ATM serine/threonine kinase pathogenic variants
Germline pathogenic variants in the ATM serine/threonine kinase (ATM) gene are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. It is important to identify germline ATM pathogenic variants in pancreatic cancer patients because these alterations are potentially targetable with chemotherapeutic drugs and/or radiation and have implications for other family members. As germline pathogenic variants in other genes have been associated with distinct histologic subtypes of pancreatic cancer, we studied the histomorphology of pancreatic cancer in 23 patients with germline ATM pathogenic variants. The histologic subtype was ductal adenocarcinoma in 19/23 (83%) of the patients, adenosquamous carcinoma in 1/23 (4%), and colloid (mucinous non-cystic) carcinoma in 3/23 (13%). The percentage of colloid (mucinous non-cystic) carcinomas is higher than we have previously observed in patients with familial and sporadic pancreatic cancer (1 and 2% in prior reports, p < 0.01 and p < 0.01, respectively). Three carcinomas (2 colloid carcinomas, 1 ductal adenocarcinoma) arose in association with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms. Among the resected pancreata, non-invasive precursor lesions, including pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and incipient intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, were identified in 83%. We conclude that pancreatic cancers in patients with germline ATM pathogenic variants are more frequently of colloid (mucinous non-cystic) morphology but are overall morphologically diverse supporting the utility of universal germline genetic testing for patients with pancreatic cancer.

9463314
ATM mutations and phenotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia families in the British Isles: expression of mutant ATM and the risk of leukemia, lymphoma, and breast cancer
We report the spectrum of 59 ATM mutations observed in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients in the British Isles. Of 51 ATM mutations identified in families native to the British Isles, 11 were founder mutations, and 2 of these 11 conferred a milder clinical phenotype with respect to both cerebellar degeneration and cellular features. We report, in two A-T families, an ATM mutation (7271T-->G) that may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in both homozygotes and heterozygotes (relative risk 12.7; P=. 0025), although there is a less severe A-T phenotype in terms of the degree of cerebellar degeneration. This mutation (7271T-->G) also allows expression of full-length ATM protein at a level comparable with that in unaffected individuals. In addition, we have studied 18 A-T patients, in 15 families, who developed leukemia, lymphoma, preleukemic T-cell proliferation, or Hodgkin lymphoma, mostly in childhood. A wide variety of ATM mutation types, including missense mutations and in-frame deletions, were seen in these patients. We also show that 25% of all A-T patients carried in-frame deletions or missense mutations, many of which were also associated with expression of mutant ATM protein.

19431188
Modeling ATM mutant proteins from missense changes confirms retained kinase activity
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is the gene mutated in the cancer-predisposing disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). We modeled ATM sequence variants identified in UK A-T patients to determine the stability and kinase activity of the resulting proteins as well as the distribution of these mutations across the coding region. Of 20 missense changes modeled, 10 proteins showed ATM kinase activity and 10 showed none. In the majority of cases the mutant ATM protein was unstable, although this was variable. Reduction in ATM kinase activity can result either from the presence of low levels of unstable mutant protein with relatively normal specific kinase activity or from stable mutant protein with deficient ATM kinase activation. Indeed, ATM mutant proteins without kinase activity toward downstream targets were still able to autophosphorylate on serine 1981, although in a much less efficient manner, suggesting that this was not sufficient for ATM activation. In terms of function, green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged kinase inactive ATM proteins could form ionizing radiation (IR)-induced foci (IRIF), at least temporarily, which colocalized with the DNA double-strand break (DSB) marker gammaH2AX. Consistent with this, both kinase active and inactive mutant ATM proteins were able to interfere with phosphorylation of targets by endogenous ATM. Since the majority of missense mutations occurred C-terminal to aa1966, including all 10 mutations with absence of kinase activity, the implication was that mutations N-terminal to this, with exceptions, are less likely to result in loss of kinase activity and therefore, are less likely to be identified in A-T patients.

18634022
Functional and computational assessment of missense variants in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene: mutations with increased cancer risk
The functional consequences of missense variants are often difficult to predict. This becomes especially relevant when DNA sequence changes are used to determine a diagnosis or prognosis. To analyze the consequences of 12 missense variants in patients with mild forms of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), we employed site-directed mutagenesis of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) cDNA followed by stable transfections into a single A-T cell line to isolate the effects of each allele on the cellular phenotype. After induction of the transfected cells with CdCl2, we monitored for successful ATM transcription and subsequently assessed: 1) intracellular ATM protein levels; 2) ionizing radiation (IR)-induced ATM kinase activity; and 3) cellular radiosensitivity. We then calculated SIFT and PolyPhen scores for the missense changes. Nine variants produced little or no correction of the A-T cellular phenotype and were interpreted to be ATM mutations; SIFT/PolyPhen scores supported this. Three variants corrected the cellular phenotype, suggesting that they represented benign variants or polymorphisms. SIFT and PolyPhen scores supported the functional analyses for one of these variants (c.1709T>C); the other two were predicted to be "not tolerated" (c.6188G>A and c.6325T>G) and were classified as "operationally neutral." Genotype/phenotype relationships were compared: three deleterious missense variants were associated with an increased risk of cancer (c.6679C>T, c.7271T>G, and c.8494C>T). In situ mutagenesis represents an effective experimental approach for distinguishing deleterious missense mutations from benign or operationally neutral missense variants.

27599564
Detection of ATM germline variants by the p53 mitotic centrosomal localization test in BRCA1/2-negative patients with early-onset breast cancer
Background:
        
      
      Variant ATM heterozygotes have an increased risk of developing cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and diabetes. Costs and time of sequencing and ATM variant complexity make large-scale, general population screenings not cost-effective yet. Recently, we developed a straightforward, rapid, and inexpensive test based on p53 mitotic centrosomal localization (p53-MCL) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) that diagnoses mutant ATM zygosity and recognizes tumor-associated ATM polymorphisms.

26976419
Frequency of Germline Mutations in 25 Cancer Susceptibility Genes in a Sequential Series of Patients With Breast Cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Testing for germline mutations in BRCA1/2 is standard for select patients with breast cancer to guide clinical management. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows testing for mutations in additional breast cancer predisposition genes. The frequency of germline mutations detected by using NGS has been reported in patients with breast cancer who were referred for BRCA1/2 testing or with triple-negative breast cancer. We assessed the frequency and predictors of mutations in 25 cancer predisposition genes, including BRCA1/2, in a sequential series of patients with breast cancer at an academic institution to examine the utility of genetic testing in this population.

24549055
Next-generation sequencing for the diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer using genomic capture targeting multiple candidate genes
To optimize the molecular diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC), we developed a next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based screening based on the capture of a panel of genes involved, or suspected to be involved in HBOC, on pooling of indexed DNA and on paired-end sequencing in an Illumina GAIIx platform, followed by confirmation by Sanger sequencing or MLPA/QMPSF. The bioinformatic pipeline included CASAVA, NextGENe, CNVseq and Alamut-HT. We validated this procedure by the analysis of 59 patients' DNAs harbouring SNVs, indels or large genomic rearrangements of BRCA1 or BRCA2. We also conducted a blind study in 168 patients comparing NGS versus Sanger sequencing or MLPA analyses of BRCA1 and BRCA2. All mutations detected by conventional procedures were detected by NGS. We then screened, using three different versions of the capture set, a large series of 708 consecutive patients. We detected in these patients 69 germline deleterious alterations within BRCA1 and BRCA2, and 4 TP53 mutations in 468 patients also tested for this gene. We also found 36 variations inducing either a premature codon stop or a splicing defect among other genes: 5/708 in CHEK2, 3/708 in RAD51C, 1/708 in RAD50, 7/708 in PALB2, 3/708 in MRE11A, 5/708 in ATM, 3/708 in NBS1, 1/708 in CDH1, 3/468 in MSH2, 2/468 in PMS2, 1/708 in BARD1, 1/468 in PMS1 and 1/468 in MLH3. These results demonstrate the efficiency of NGS in performing molecular diagnosis of HBOC. Detection of mutations within other genes than BRCA1 and BRCA2 highlights the genetic heterogeneity of HBOC.

25749350
Systematic search for rare variants in Finnish early-onset colorectal cancer patients
The heritability of colorectal cancer (CRC) is incompletely understood, and the contribution of undiscovered rare variants may be important. In search of rare disease-causing variants, we exome sequenced 22 CRC patients who were diagnosed before the age of 40 years. Exome sequencing data from 95 familial CRC patients were available as a validation set. Cases with known CRC syndromes were excluded. All patients were from Finland, a country known for its genetically homogenous population. We searched for rare nonsynonymous variants with allele frequencies below 0.1% in 3,374 Finnish and 58,112 non-Finnish controls. In addition, homozygous and compound heterozygous variants were studied. No genes with rare loss-of-function variants were present in more than one early-onset CRC patient. Three genes (ADAMTS4, CYTL1, and SYNE1) harbored rare loss-of-function variants in both early-onset and familial CRC cases. Five genes with homozygous variants in early-onset CRC cases were found (MCTP2, ARHGAP12, ATM, DONSON, and ROS1), including one gene (MCTP2) with a homozygous splice site variant. All discovered homozygous variants were exclusive to one early-onset CRC case. Independent replication is required to associate the discovered variants with CRC. These findings, together with a lack of family history in 19 of 22 (86%) early-onset patients, suggest genetic heterogeneity in unexplained early-onset CRC patients, thus emphasizing the requirement for large sample sizes and careful study designs to elucidate the role of rare variants in CRC susceptibility.

16914028
ATM variants and cancer risk in breast cancer patients from Southern Finland
Background:
        
      
      Individuals heterozygous for germline ATM mutations have been reported to have an increased risk for breast cancer but the role for ATM genetic variants for breast cancer risk has remained unclear. Recently, a common ATM variant, ATMivs38 -8T>C in cis with the ATMex39 5557G>A (D1853N) variant, was suggested to associate with bilateral breast cancer among familial breast cancer patients from Northern Finland. We have here evaluated the 5557G>A and ivs38-8T>C variants in an extensive case-control association analysis. We also aimed to investigate whether there are other ATM mutations or variants contributing to breast cancer risk in our population.

29368341
Intraductal/ductal histology and lymphovascular invasion are associated with germline DNA-repair gene mutations in prostate cancer
Background:
        
      
      Germline mutations in genes mediating DNA repair are common in men with recurrent and advanced prostate cancer, and their presence may alter prognosis and management. We aimed to define pathological and clinical characteristics associated with germline DNA-repair gene mutations, to facilitate selection of patients for germline testing.

34026625
Exome sequencing in BRCA1-2 candidate familias: the contribution of other cancer susceptibility genes
Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) syndrome is a condition in which the risk of breast and ovarian cancer is higher than in the general population. The prevalent pathogenesis is attributable to inactivating variants of the BRCA1-2 highly penetrant genes, however, other cancer susceptibility genes may also be involved. By Exome Sequencing (WES) we analyzed a series of 200 individuals selected for genetic testing in BRCA1-2 genes according to the updated National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. Analysis by MLPA was performed to detect large BRCA1-2 deletions/duplications. Focusing on BRCA1-2 genes, data analysis identified 11 cases with pathogenic variants (4 in BRCA1 and 7 in BRCA1-2) and 12 with uncertain variants (7 in BRCA1 and 5 in BRCA2). Only one case was found with a large BRCA1 deletion. Whole exome analysis allowed to characterize pathogenic variants in 21 additional genes: 10 genes more traditionally associated to breast and ovarian cancer (ATM, BRIP1, CDH1, PALB2, PTEN, RAD51C, and TP53) (5% diagnostic yield) and 11 in candidate cancer susceptibility genes (DPYD, ERBB3, ERCC2, MUTYH, NQO2, NTHL1, PARK2, RAD54L, and RNASEL). In conclusion, this study allowed a personalized risk assessment and clinical surveillance in an increased number of HBOC families and to broaden the spectrum of causative variants also to candidate non-canonical genes.

12815592
Independent mutational events are rare in the ATM gene: haplotype prescreening enhances mutation detection rate
Mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). Many different mutations have been identified using various techniques, with detection efficiencies ranging from 57 to 85%. In this study, we employed short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes to enhance mutation identification in 55 unrelated A-T families of Iberian origin (20 Spanish, 17 Brazilian, and 18 Hispanic-American); we were able to identify 95% of the expected mutations. Allelic sizes were standardized based on a reference sample (CEPH 1347-2). Subsequent mutation screening was performed by PTT, SSCP, and DHPLC, and abnormal regions were sequenced. Many STR haplotypes were found within each population and six haplotypes were observed across several of these populations. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) haplotypes further suggested that most of these common mutations are ancestrally related, and not hot spots. However, two mutations (8977C>T and 8264_8268delATAAG) may indeed be recurring mutational events. Common haplotypes were present in 13 of 20 Spanish A-T families (65%), in 11 of 17 Brazilian A-T families (65%), and, in contrast, in only eight of 18 Hispanic-American families (44%). Three mutations were identified that would be missed by conventional screening strategies. In all, 62 different mutations (28 not previously reported) were identified and their associated haplotypes defined, thereby establishing a new database for Iberian A-T families, and extending the spectrum of worldwide ATM mutations.

9682216
A model for ATM heterozygote identification in a large population: four founder-effect ATM mutations identify most of Costa Rican patients with ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder with a broad range of clinical manifestations and a frequency of 1:40,000-100,000 live births. Epidemiological studies have suggested that A-T heterozygotes are at an elevated risk of breast cancer. ATM mutations occur worldwide over the entire ATM gene, making it difficult to identify heterozygotes in large populations. However, some founder-effect mutations are specific for certain populations. Here, we present four mutations in Costa Rican A-T patients that accounted for 86-93% of 41 patients studied in two batches. We have developed assays for rapid detection of these four mutations which can be used diagnostically. They will also enable the Costa Rican population to be used as a model for analyzing the role of ATM heterozygosity in cancer development and other disorders.

22071889
Underexpression and abnormal localization of ATM products in ataxia telangiectasia patients bearing ATM missense mutations
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immune defects and predisposition to malignancies. A-T is caused by biallelic inactivation of the ATM gene, in most cases by frameshift or nonsense mutations. More rarely, ATM missense mutations with unknown consequences on ATM function are found, making definitive diagnosis more challenging. In this study, a series of 15 missense mutations, including 11 not previously reported, were identified in 16 patients with clinical diagnosis of A-T belonging to 14 families and 1 patient with atypical clinical features. ATM function was evaluated in patient lymphoblastoid cell lines by measuring H2AX and KAP1 phosphorylation in response to ionizing radiation, confirming the A-T diagnosis for 16 cases. In accordance with previous studies, we showed that missense mutations associated with A-T often lead to ATM protein underexpression (15 out of 16 cases). In addition, we demonstrated that most missense mutations lead to an abnormal cytoplasmic localization of ATM, correlated with its decreased expression. This new finding highlights ATM mislocalization as a new mechanism of ATM dysfunction, which may lead to therapeutic strategies for missense mutation associated A-T.

31465090
Pathogenic Germline Variants in Patients With Metastatic Breast Cancer
This genetic association study examines the prevalence of pathogenic/likely pathogenic germline variants among patients with metastatic breast cancer.

33376610
Six Novel ATM Gene Variants in Sri Lankan Patients with Ataxia Telangiectasia
Introduction:
        
      
      Ataxia telangiectasia is a rare genetic condition with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 40,000-100,000 live births. This condition predominantly affects the nervous and immune systems. It is characterized by progressive ataxia beginning from early childhood. The neurological deficit associated with this condition affects one's balance, coordination, walking, and speech and can be accompanied by chorea, myoclonus, and neuropathy. They may also have ocular telangiectasias and high levels of blood alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) is associated with this condition and codes for the ATM protein which is a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. This gene occupies 150 kb on chromosome 11q22-23 and contains 66 exons encoding a 13 kb transcript. ATM is a relatively large protein with a molecular weight of 350 kDa and 3,056 amino acids.

12882767
Idiopathic and radiation-induced ocular telangiectasia: the involvement of the ATM gene
Purpose:
        
      
      To investigate whether individuals, with no family history of ataxia telangiectasia (AT), in whom idiopathic or radiation-induced ocular telangiectasia developed are carriers of ATM gene mutations.

32068069
Germline Mutation in 1338 BRCA-Negative Chinese Hereditary Breast and/or Ovarian Cancer Patients: Clinical Testing with a Multigene Test Panel
Differences in the mutation spectrum across ethnicities suggest the importance of identifying genes in addition to common high penetrant genes to estimate the associated breast cancer risk in China. A total of 1338 high-risk breast cancer patients who tested negative for germline BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, and PTEN mutations between 2007 and 2017 were selected from the Hong Kong Hereditary Breast Cancer Family Registry. Patient samples were subjected to next-generation DNA sequencing using a multigene panel (Color Genomics). All detected pathogenic variants were validated by bidirectional DNA sequencing. The sequencing data were coanalyzed by a bioinformatics pipeline developed in-house. Sixty-one pathogenic variants (4.6%) were identified in this cohort in 11 cancer predisposition genes. Most carriers (77.1%) had early onset of breast cancer (age <45 years), 32.8% had family members with breast cancer, and 11.5% had triple-negative breast cancer. The most common mutated genes were PALB2 (1.4%), RAD51D (0.8%), and ATM (0.8%). A total of 612 variants of unknown significance were identified in 494 patients, and 87.4% of the variants of unknown significance were missense mutations. Pathogenic variants in cancer predisposition genes beyond BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, and PTEN were detected in an additional 4.6% of patients using the multigene panel. PALB2 (1.4%) and RAD51D (0.8%) were the most commonly mutated genes in patients who tested mutation negative by a four-gene panel.

33365035
Prenatal Diagnosis for Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders-An Overview of the Indian Scenario
Prenatal Diagnosis (PND) forms an important part of primary preventive management for families having a child affected with primary immunodeficiency. Although individually sparse, collectively this group of genetic disorders represents a significant burden of disease. This paper discusses the prenatal services available for affected families at various centers across the country and the challenges and ethical considerations associated with genetic counseling. Mutation detection in the index case and analysis of chorionic villous sampling or amniocentesis remain the preferred procedures for PND and phenotypic analysis of cordocentesis sample is reserved for families with well-characterized index case seeking PND in the latter part of the second trimester of pregnancy. A total of 112 families were provided PND services in the last decade and the presence of an affected fetus was confirmed in 32 families. Post-test genetic counseling enabled the affected families to make an informed decision about the current pregnancy.

22354567
Fatal outcome despite full lympho-hematopoietic reconstitution after allogeneic stem cell transplantation in atypical ataxia telangiectasia
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has not been a therapeutic option in ataxia telangiectasia (AT) due to overwhelming toxicity of conditioning in the context of the global DNA repair deficiency. Furthermore HSCT is unable to cure neurological involvement of AT. We report on a Turkish child with a Hyper IgM phenotype disorder, in which clinical aspects of AT were absent and thus, AT not diagnosed. He was transplanted with a reduced toxicity, but full intensity conditioning regimen comprising treosulfan, fludarabine and ATG. The peritransplant period was uneventful and the patient was discharged at day +57. 8 months after HSCT, the patient developed hepatopathy with monoclonal gammopathy of unclear significance and died due to hepatic failure and encephalopathy at the age of 32 months. Post mortem high throughput sequencing revealed a mutation in the ATM gene.

29506079
The Landscape of Somatic Genetic Alterations in Breast Cancers From ATM Germline Mutation Carriers
Pathogenic germline variants in ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), a gene that plays a role in DNA damage response and cell cycle checkpoints, confer an increased breast cancer (BC) risk. Here, we investigated the phenotypic characteristics and landscape of somatic genetic alterations in 24 BCs from ATM germline mutation carriers by whole-exome and targeted sequencing. ATM-associated BCs were consistently hormone receptor positive and largely displayed minimal immune infiltrate. Although 79.2% of these tumors exhibited loss of heterozygosity of the ATM wild-type allele, none displayed high activity of mutational signature 3 associated with defective homologous recombination DNA (HRD) repair. No TP53 mutations were found in the ATM-associated BCs. Analysis of an independent data set confirmed that germline ATM variants and TP53 somatic mutations are mutually exclusive. Our findings indicate that ATM-associated BCs often harbor bi-allelic inactivation of ATM, are phenotypically distinct from BRCA1/2-associated BCs, lack HRD-related mutational signatures, and that TP53 and ATM genetic alterations are likely epistatic.

15164409
Identification of two mutations for ataxia telangiectasia among the Druze community
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, immunodeficiency, susceptibility to lymphoreticular malignancies and cancer predisposition, hypersensitivity to ionic radiation and chromosomal instability. In this study, we report a founder effect of AT with two different mutations: 1339 C > T and 6672 del GG together with 6677 del TACG, found in four Israeli Druze clans originating from three different Druze centers in the Middle East (Lebanon, Syria and Jordan). The 1339 C > T mutation, which results in a stop codon at position 447 of the ATM protein, was observed in two unrelated clans originating from Lebanon and Jordan. The 6672 del GG/6677 del TACG mutation was observed in two unrelated clans originating from Syria and Lebanon. In the present study, simple and fast detection assays were developed for both mutations. The ability to identify AT carriers routinely provides a unique opportunity for prenatal diagnosis, genetic counseling as well as marriage guidance in the Druze community.

32832836
Pathogenic Variants in Cancer Predisposition Genes and Prostate Cancer Risk in Men of African Ancestry
Purpose:
        
      
      In studies of men of European ancestry, rare pathogenic variants in DNA repair pathway genes have been shown to be associated with risk of aggressive prostate cancer. The contribution of rare coding variation to prostate cancer risk in men of African ancestry has not been established.

17910737
Large genomic mutations within the ATM gene detected by MLPA, including a duplication of 41 kb from exon 4 to 20
Mutation detection remains problematic for large genes, primarily because PCR-based methodology fails to detect heterozygous deletions and any duplication. In the ATM gene only a handful of multi-exon deletions have been described to date, and this type of mutation has been considered rare. To address this issue we tested a new MLPA (Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification) kit that covers 33 of the 66 ATM exons, using for controls two previously characterized genomic deletions in addition to three A-T patients, taken from a survey of nine, who had missing four mutations unidentified after conventional mutation screening. We identified for the first time: 1) a approximately 41 kb genomic duplication spanning exons 4-20 (c.-30_2816dup41kb)(a.k.a., ATM dup 41 kb); 2) a novel genomic deletion including exon 31, and 3) in hemizygosis a point mutation in the non-deleted exon 31. In this study we extended mutation detection to nine new Italian A-T patients, using a combined approach of haplotype analysis, DHPLC and MLPA. Overall we achieved a mutation detection rate of >97%, and can now define a spectrum of ATM mutations based on twenty-one consecutive Italian families with A-T.

32255556
Burden of hereditary cancer susceptibility in unselected patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma referred for germline screening
Background:
        
      
      Recent guidelines recommend consideration of germline testing for all newly diagnosed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The primary aim of this study was to determine the burden of hereditary cancer susceptibility in PDAC. A secondary aim was to compare genetic testing uptake rates across different modes of genetic counselling.

34399810
Significant detection of new germline pathogenic variants in Australian Pancreatic Cancer Screening Program participants
Background:
        
      
      The Australian Pancreatic Cancer Screening Program (APCSP) offers endoscopic ultrasound surveillance for individuals at increased risk of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) with all participants requiring assessment by a Familial Cancer Service before or after study enrolment.

3030537
Translocation (X;18) in a synovial sarcoma


23807571
Twelve novel Atm mutations identified in Chinese ataxia telangiectasia patients
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized mainly by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, and immunodeficiency. This disease is caused by mutations of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (Atm) gene. More than 500 Atm mutations that are responsible for A-T have been identified so far. However, there have been very few A-T cases reported in China, and only two Chinese A-T patients have undergone Atm gene analysis. In order to systemically investigate A-T in China and map their Atm mutation spectrum, we recruited eight Chinese A-T patients from six unrelated families nationwide. Using direct sequencing of genomic DNA and the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, we identified twelve pathogenic Atm mutations, including one missense, four nonsense, five frameshift, one splicing, and one large genomic deletion. All the Atm mutations we identified were novel, and no homozygous mutation and founder-effect mutation were found. These results suggest that Atm mutations in Chinese populations are diverse and distinct largely from those in other ethnic areas.

23509889
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in early childhood as the presenting sign of ataxia-telangiectasia variant
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), an autosomal recessive disorder is characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, sensitivity to ionizing radiation, and predisposition to cancer, especially to lymphoid malignancies. A-T variant is characterized by a milder clinical phenotype and is caused by missense or leaky splice site mutations that produce residual ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase activity. Lymphoid malignancy can precede the diagnosis of A-T, particularly in young children with mild neurological symptoms. We studied a consanguineous family with four A-T variant patients, three of them developed T-ALL at a young age before the diagnosis of A-T was established. ATM mutation analysis detected two new missense mutations both within exon 12: c.1514T>C and c.1547T>C. All four patients are homozygous for the two mutations, while their parents are heterozygous for the mutations. ATM protein level was low in all patients and the response to the radiomimetic agent, neocarzinostatin, was reduced. Leukemic presentation in a young age in three members of consanguineous family led to the identification of a new missense mutation in the ATM gene. The diagnosis of A-T or A-T variant should be considered in children with neurological abnormalities who develop T-ALL at a young age.

30124550
Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma in an Infant With Familial ATM Mutations
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive neurologic dysfunction, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, and cancer susceptibility, is caused by mutations in the ATM gene. A previous study of 4 A-T patients identified 2 rare homozygous missense mutations residing on the same allele of the ATM gene: c.1514T>C and c.1547T>C, which were shown to decrease ATM levels and increase T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia predisposition. We studied 5 patients from 2 consanguineous Bedouin families of the same tribe, presenting with A-T. Whole-exome sequencing data identified the 2 aforementioned mutations in ATM, which segregated within all family members as expected of autosomal recessive heredity. Interestingly, one individual was diagnosed with malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (MPM), an extremely rare neoplasm in pediatric patients. Here, we describe a case of a 4-month-old infant homozygous for the 2 ATM mutations, who developed MPM and died by the age of 2 years. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of peritoneal mesothelioma in an infant bearing ATM mutations, and one of the youngest pediatric mesotheliomas described. Thus, the risk of MPM might be considered in the follow-up of A-T patients, and ATM mutations sought in cases of early-onset MPM.

32172615
A novel mutation in ATM gene in a Saudi female with ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia is a hereditary multisystem disorder with a wide range of symptoms and signs. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner due to a mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, which encodes a protein kinase with a domain related to a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3 kinase) proteins that respond to DNA damage by phosphorylating key substrates involved in DNA repair and/or cell cycle control. The characteristics of the disease include progressive cerebellar ataxia beginning between ages one and four years, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, telangiectasias of the conjunctiva, immunodeficiency with frequent infections, and an increased risk for malignancy. In this article, we report a novel homozygous missense variant c.1516G > T, p.(Gly506Cys) in the ATM gene causing ataxia telangiectasia in a Saudi female. This variant led to the development of a later onset disease (at the age of 14 years) and the classical neurodegenerative process both clinically and on imaging. However, no immune system dysfunction or endocrine abnormalities were present. This is the second novel mutation in this gene so far reported from Saudi Arabia. The novel mutation described in the present study widened the genetic spectrum of ATM-associated diseases, which will benefit studies addressing this disease in the future.

32325837
Insights into Genetic Susceptibility to Melanoma by Gene Panel Testing: Potential Pathogenic Variants in ACD, ATM, BAP1, and POT1
The contribution of recently established or candidate susceptibility genes to melanoma missing heritability has yet to be determined. Multigene panel testing could increase diagnostic yield and better define the role of candidate genes. We characterized 273 CDKN2A/ARF and CDK4-negative probands through a custom-designed targeted gene panel that included CDKN2A/ARF, CDK4, ACD, BAP1, MITF, POT1, TERF2IP, ATM, and PALB2. Co-segregation, loss of heterozygosity (LOH)/protein expression analysis, and splicing characterization were performed to improve variant classification. We identified 16 (5.9%) pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in established high/medium penetrance cutaneous melanoma susceptibility genes (BAP1, POT1, ACD, MITF, and TERF2IP), including two novel variants in BAP1 and 4 in POT1. We also found four deleterious and five likely deleterious variants in ATM (3.3%). Thus, including potentially deleterious variants in ATM increased the diagnostic yield to about 9%. Inclusion of rare variants of uncertain significance would increase the overall detection yield to 14%. At least 10% of melanoma missing heritability may be explained through panel testing in our population. To our knowledge, this is the highest frequency of putative ATM deleterious variants reported in melanoma families, suggesting a possible role in melanoma susceptibility, which needs further investigation.

15039971
Five haplotypes account for fifty-five percent of ATM mutations in Brazilian patients with ataxia telangiectasia: seven new mutations
We have studied the molecular genetics of 27 Brazilian families with ataxia telangiectasia (AT). Five founder effect haplotypes accounted for 55.5% of the families. AT is an autosomal recessive disorder of childhood onset characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular apraxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, radiation sensitivity, chromosomal instability, and predisposition to cancer. The ATM gene spans more than 150 kb on chromosome region 11q23.1 and encodes a product of 3056 amino acids. The ATM protein is a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K) family of proteins and is involved in cell cycle control and DNA repair pathways. DNA was isolated from lymphoblastoid cell lines and haplotyped using four STR markers (D11S1818, NS22, D11S2179, D11S1819) within and flanking the ATM gene; all allele sizes were standardized in advance. In addition to the STR haplotypes, SNP haplotypes were determined using 10 critical polymorphisms. The entire gene was screened sequentially by protein truncation testing (PTT), single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), and then denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) to identify the disease-causing mutations. Of the expected 54 mutations, 50 were identified. All mutations but one, led to a truncated or null form of the ATM protein (nonsense, splice site, or frameshift). Five families (18.5%) carried a deletion of 3450nt (from IVS28 to Ex31), making this one of the two most common Brazilian mutations. Mutations were located throughout the entire gene, with no clustering or hotspots. Standardized STR haplotype analysis greatly enhanced the efficiency of mutation screening.

12473594
Rare variants of ATM and risk for Hodgkin's disease and radiation-associated breast cancers
Purpose:
        
      
      In this study, we first sought to evaluate whether individuals heterozygous for ATM mutations may have an increased susceptibility to radiation-induced breast cancer (BC) after treatment for Hodgkin's disease (HD). We next sought to determine the frequency of ATM variants in patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma, regardless of coexisting BC, compared with healthy volunteers.

30995915
Genetic analyses of aplastic anemia and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients with short telomeres, possible implication of DNA-repair genes
Background:
        
      
      Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures present at the terminal region of the chromosomes. Mutations in genes coding for proteins involved in telomere maintenance are causative of a number of disorders known as telomeropathies. The genetic origin of these diseases is heterogeneous and has not been determined for a significant proportion of patients.

11606401
Spectrum of ATM gene mutations in a hospital-based series of unselected breast cancer patients
Blood relatives of patients with the inherited disease ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) have an increased susceptibility for breast cancer. We therefore looked for sequence alterations of the ATM gene in a large hospital-based series of unselected breast cancer patients. The whole ATM coding sequence was analyzed in genomic DNA samples from a core group of 192 consecutive breast cancer cases to define the spectrum of ATM gene mutations. Common sequence alterations were then screened in the whole series of 1000 breast cancer patients and in 500 random individuals. In the core group, 21 distinct sequence alterations were identified throughout the ATM coding region, and 1 common splicing mutation was uncovered in intron 10. Almost half of the breast cancer patients (46%) were heterozygotes for 1 of 16 different amino acid substitutions, and three patients (1.6%) carried a truncating mutation. These data indicate that approximately 1 in 50 German breast cancer patients is heterozygous for an A-T-causing mutation. In our extended series, the most common A-T mutation 1066-6T-->G was disclosed in 7 of 1000 (0.7%) breast cancer patients. Transcript analyses indicated that the loss of exon 11 in the ATM mRNA was the pathogenic consequence of this splicing mutation, which produced a <10% of full-length ATM mRNA and ATM protein in a homozygous A-T patient. We also found an excess of rare missense substitutions in the breast cancer cohort compared with random individuals (7.9% versus 5.3% of alleles; odds ratio = 1.6; P < 0.01). One missense substitution, S707P in exon 15, was two times more frequent in breast cancer patients (odds ratio = 2.4; 95% confidence interval, 1.0-5.8) and five times more frequent in patients with bilateral disease than in random individuals (P < 0.001). We conclude that a large variety of distinct ATM mutations and variants exist among breast cancer patients, some of which can contribute to the etiology and progression of the malignancy. Screening for frequent A-T mutations such as the 1066-6-->G splice site substitution can be effective to prospectively identify A-T heterozygotes in an unselected cancer patient population.

11996792
Elevated frequency of ATM gene missense mutations in breast cancer relative to ethnically matched controls
Studies of families of patients with ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) show an increased risk of breast cancer in heterozygous A-T carriers. However, expected increased levels of mutations in the ATM gene among unselected breast cancer patients have not been found to date. Previous methods of mutation detection were biased toward the detection of truncating mutations, and single nucleotide substitutions were likely to have been underreported. In this study, genomic DNA from 43 breast cancer patients and 43 control individuals were scanned for mutations in the entire ATM coding region (exons 4-65) and adjacent intronic splice regions (three megabases total) using detection of virtually all mutation-single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), a modification of SSCP with sufficient redundancy to detect virtually all mutations. Excluding a polymorphism found commonly in cases and controls, there were missense changes in 12 breast cancer patients, one of whom also had a protein truncating mutation, versus six controls (P=0.09). When all structural changes common to the cases and controls were excluded, missense or truncating changes were found in 10 cases compared to two in controls (P=0.013). The background of missense changes in controls is high. There is a trend towards elevation of all structural changes in cases, but the results are not statistically significant. Cohort-specific structural changes are significantly more prevalent in the breast cancer patients. The data are compatible with certain missense mutations in ATM predisposing to breast cancer.

16574953
Variants in the ATM-BRCA2-CHEK2 axis predispose to chronic lymphocytic leukemia
We conducted a large-scale association study to identify low-penetrance susceptibility alleles for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), analyzing 992 patients and 2707 healthy controls. To increase the likelihood of identifying disease-causing alleles we genotyped 1467 coding nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in 865 candidate cancer genes, biasing nsSNP selection toward those predicted to be deleterious. Preeminent associations were identified in SNPs mapping to genes pivotal in the DNA damage-response and cell-cycle pathways, including ATM F858L (odds ratio [OR] = 2.28, P < .0001) and P1054R (OR = 1.68, P = .0006), CHEK2 I157T (OR = 14.83, P = .0008), BRCA2 N372H (OR = 1.45, P = .0032), and BUB1B Q349R (OR = 1.42, P = .0038). Our findings implicate variants in the ATM-BRCA2-CHEK2 DNA damage-response axis with risk of CLL.

14735203
Molecular variants of the ATM gene in Hodgkin's disease in children
Ataxia telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive disease with a striking predisposition of lymphoid malignancies. ATM mutations have been reported in adult sporadic lymphoma and leukaemia. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible involvement of the ATM gene in the carcinogenesis of Hodgkin disease in children. Tumours were obtained from 23 patients and were subjected to mutation screening and loss of heterozygosity analysis. Eight base substitutions were identified in seven patients. Of them, Y54Y, a silent change, was observed in two patients and a known polymorphism, D1853N, in three patients. Of the other two patients, one harboured a combined genotype P604S/F1463C, identified previously in two patients with Hodgkin lymphoma, and the other a novel missense mutation, V595A. The alterations were present in the germ line, and both had a more aggressive disease. In all, 100 matched normal ethnic controls were screened for these mutations and P604S/F1463C was identified in one healthy control. Loss of heterozygosity was identified in four patients and in three of them it was located centromeric to the ATM gene, and, in one, it spanned a large region, indicating the involvement of other tumour-suppressor genes in this disease. Missense variants of the ATM gene are a rare event in childhood Hodgkin disease.

34008015
Novel LRRK2 mutations and other rare, non-BAP1-related candidate tumor predisposition gene variants in high-risk cancer families with mesothelioma and other tumors
There is irrefutable evidence that germline BRCA1-associated protein 1 gene (BAP1) mutations contribute to malignant mesothelioma (MM) susceptibility. However, BAP1 mutations are not found in all cases with evidence of familial MM or in other high-risk cancer families affected by various cancers, including MM. The goal of this study was to use whole genome sequencing (WGS) to determine the frequency and types of germline gene variants occurring in 12 MM patients who were selected from a series of 141 asbestos-exposed MM patients with a family history of cancer but without a germline BAP1 mutation. WGS was also performed on two MM cases, a proband and sibling, from a previously reported family with multiple cases of MM without the inheritance of a predisposing BAP1 mutation. Altogether, germline DNA sequencing variants were identified in 21 cancer-related genes in 10 of the 13 probands. Germline indel, splice site and missense mutations and two large deletions were identified. Among the 13 MM index cases, 6 (46%) exhibited one or more predicted pathogenic mutations. Affected genes encode proteins involved in DNA repair (ATM, ATR, BRCA2, BRIP1, CHEK2, MLH3, MUTYH, POLE, POLE4, POLQ and XRCC1), chromatin modification (ARID1B, DNMT3A, JARID2 and SETD1B) or other cellular pathways: leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) (two cases) and MSH4. Notably, somatic truncating mutation or deletions of LRRK2 were occasionally found in MMs in The Cancer Genome Atlas, and the expression of LRRK2 was undetectable or downregulated in a majority of primary MMs and MM cell lines we examined, implying that loss of LRRK2 expression is a newly recognized tumor suppressor alteration in MM.

21787400
Rare variants in the ATM gene and risk of breast cancer
Introduction:
        
      
      The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene (MIM ID 208900) encodes a protein kinase that plays a significant role in the activation of cellular responses to DNA double-strand breaks through subsequent phosphorylation of central players in the DNA damage-response pathway. Recent studies have confirmed that some specific variants in the ATM gene are associated with increased breast cancer (BC) risk. However, the magnitude of risk and the subset of variants that are pathogenic for breast cancer remain unresolved.

23561644
Exome sequencing identifies nonsegregating nonsense ATM and PALB2 variants in familial pancreatic cancer
We sequenced 11 germline exomes from five families with familial pancreatic cancer (FPC). One proband had a germline nonsense variant in ATM with somatic loss of the variant allele. Another proband had a nonsense variant in PALB2 with somatic loss of the variant allele. Both variants were absent in a relative with FPC. These findings question the causal mechanisms of ATM and PALB2 in these families and highlight challenges in identifying the causes of familial cancer syndromes using exome sequencing.

24368146
Ataxia telangiectasia in a three-year-old-girl


28135719
Prevalence and architecture of de novo mutations in developmental disorders
The genomes of individuals with severe, undiagnosed developmental disorders are enriched in damaging de novo mutations (DNMs) in developmentally important genes. Here we have sequenced the exomes of 4,293 families containing individuals with developmental disorders, and meta-analysed these data with data from another 3,287 individuals with similar disorders. We show that the most important factors influencing the diagnostic yield of DNMs are the sex of the affected individual, the relatedness of their parents, whether close relatives are affected and the parental ages. We identified 94 genes enriched in damaging DNMs, including 14 that previously lacked compelling evidence of involvement in developmental disorders. We have also characterized the phenotypic diversity among these disorders. We estimate that 42% of our cohort carry pathogenic DNMs in coding sequences; approximately half of these DNMs disrupt gene function and the remainder result in altered protein function. We estimate that developmental disorders caused by DNMs have an average prevalence of 1 in 213 to 1 in 448 births, depending on parental age. Given current global demographics, this equates to almost 400,000 children born per year.

29492593
Novel biallelic ATM mutations coexist with a mosaic form of triple X syndrome in an 11-year-old girl at remission after T cell acute leukemia
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare neurodegenerative disease characterized by an early onset ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, radio-sensitivity, and a predisposition to malignancy. We present the case of a child with coexistent AT and trisomy X (47,XXX). We used fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to confirm that this person had 47,XXX karyotype in blood cells, bone marrow, fibroblasts, and buccal smear. Standard cytogenetic studies (not banded) were conducted on blood cells. G-banding analysis was performed on bone marrow cells at the time of the leukemia diagnosis. Flow cytometric investigation of lymphocytes and Sanger sequencing of the ATM gene were used for diagnosis confirmation and description. We report the case of an 11-year-old girl at remission after having T cell acute leukemia for 7 years with progressive signs of ataxia-telangiectasia and with additional X chromosome since birth. At the age of 2 years and 7 months, she was diagnosed with pre-T acute leukemia. From the age of four, she had gait abnormalities. AT was established at the age of seven based on clinical signs and laboratory findings (increased alpha fetoprotein-AFP [227]) and confirmed by detecting compound heterozygous truncating mutations in the ATM gene (p.Y705X and p.L2312I). These genetic findings have not been previously reported in AT and our "double hit" case demonstrates the value of careful clinical evaluation of children with an established genetic diagnosis. Measurement of AFP levels should be considered in patients with neurologic abnormalities after leukemia treatment.

33919281
Clinicopathologic Profile of Breast Cancer in Germline ATM and CHEK2 Mutation Carriers
The most common breast cancer (BC) susceptibility genes beyond BRCA1/2 are ATM and CHEK2. For the purpose of exploring the clinicopathologic characteristics of BC developed by ATM or CHEK2 mutation carriers, we reviewed the archive of our Family Cancer Clinic. Since 2018, 1185 multi-gene panel tests have been performed. Nineteen ATM and 17 CHEK2 mutation carriers affected by 46 different BCs were identified. A high rate of bilateral tumors was observed in ATM (26.3%) and CHEK2 mutation carriers (41.2%). While 64.3% of CHEK2 tumors were luminal A-like, 56.2% of ATM tumors were luminal B-like/HER2-negative. Moreover, 21.4% of CHEK2-related invasive tumors showed a lobular histotype. About a quarter of all ATM-related BCs and a third of CHEK2 BCs were in situ carcinomas and more than half of ATM and CHEK2-related BCs were diagnosed at stage I-II. Finally, 63.2% of ATM mutation carriers and 64.7% of CHEK2 mutation carriers presented a positive BC family history. The biological and clinical characteristics of ATM and CHEK2-related tumors may help improve diagnosis, prognostication and targeted therapeutic approaches. Contralateral mastectomy should be considered and discussed with ATM and CHEK2 mutation carriers at the first diagnosis of BC.

27664052
Molecular and Functional Characterization of a Cohort of Spanish Patients with Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a multisystemic disease with severe neurological affectation, immunodeficiency and telangiectasia. The disorder is caused by alterations in the ATM gene, whose size and complexity make molecular diagnosis difficult. We designed a target-enrichment next-generation sequencing strategy to characterize 28 patients from several regions of Spain. This approach allowed us to identify gene variants affecting function in 54 out of the 56 alleles analyzed, although the two unresolved alleles belong to brothers. We found 28 ATM gene mutations, of which 10 have not been reported. A total of 171 gene variants not affecting function were also found, of which 22 are reported to predispose to disease. Interestingly, all Roma (Spanish Gypsies) patients are homozygous for the same mutation and share the H3 ATM haplotype, which is strong evidence of a founder effect in this population. In addition, we generated a panel of 27 primary T cell lines from A-T patients, which revealed significant expression of ATM in two patients and traces of the protein in nine more. None of them retained residual ATM activity, and almost all T cell lines show increased or intermediate radiosensitivity.

33206719
Clinical and molecular characterization of COVID-19 hospitalized patients
Clinical and molecular characterization by Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) is reported in 35 COVID-19 patients attending the University Hospital in Siena, Italy, from April 7 to May 7, 2020. Eighty percent of patients required respiratory assistance, half of them being on mechanical ventilation. Fiftyone percent had hepatic involvement and hyposmia was ascertained in 3 patients. Searching for common genes by collapsing methods against 150 WES of controls of the Italian population failed to give straightforward statistically significant results with the exception of two genes. This result is not unexpected since we are facing the most challenging common disorder triggered by environmental factors with a strong underlying heritability (50%). The lesson learned from Autism-Spectrum-Disorders prompted us to re-analyse the cohort treating each patient as an independent case, following a Mendelian-like model. We identified for each patient an average of 2.5 pathogenic mutations involved in virus infection susceptibility and pinpointing to one or more rare disorder(s). To our knowledge, this is the first report on WES and COVID-19. Our results suggest a combined model for COVID-19 susceptibility with a number of common susceptibility genes which represent the favorite background in which additional host private mutations may determine disease progression.

11746755
Screening breast cancer patients for ATM mutations and polymorphisms by using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography
All 62 coding exons of the ATM gene, along with 10-20 bases of the intronic region flanking each exon, were screened for DNA base sequence alterations by using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) in a series of 52 breast cancer patients. Six (12%) of these patients exhibited a total of eight different novel germ-line mutations that do not represent common polymorphisms. Of these, three patients possessed four nonconservative missense mutations while two conservative missense and two synonymous mutations were detected in the other three patients. In addition, 43 patients were found to have a total of 141 DNA sequence variations representing 21 different common polymorphisms and rare variants. An analysis of the relationship between the presence of a novel ATM mutation and either patient demographics or tumor properties demonstrated a significant difference between African Americans (3/7 = 43%) and other ethnic groups (3/45 = 7%, P = 0.026). None of the other characteristics examined was found to be related to mutation status.

32962729
Whole-exome sequencing in patients with premature ovarian insufficiency: early detection and early intervention
Background:
        
      
      The loss of ovarian function in women, referred to as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI), is associated with a series of concomitant diseases. POI is genetically heterogeneous, and in most cases, the etiology is unknown.

9043869
Exon-scanning mutation analysis of the ATM gene in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia
Using a polymerase chain reaction single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) assay, which amplifies individually all coding exons of the ATM gene deficient ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), we have analyzed 10 patients with A-T for ATM mutations. Mutation were detected in 9 patients. We describe the first ATM mutation in the splice junction found in the 5' splice site of intron 17, leading to exon skipping. However, most mutations were small deletions or insertions resulting in premature termination of the translation product. The development of DNA-based methods for detection of unknown mutations and further characterization of ATM mutation pattern will facilitate identification of A-T carriers and assessment of their cancer risk.

20308662
Child with ataxia telangiectasia developing acute myeloid leukemia


29945567
Pancreatic cancer as a sentinel for hereditary cancer predisposition
Background:
        
      
      Genes associated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) and colorectal cancer (CRC) predisposition have been shown to play a role in pancreatic cancer susceptibility. Growing evidence suggests that pancreatic cancer may be useful as a sentinel cancer to identify families that could benefit from HBOC or CRC surveillance, but to date pancreatic cancer is only considered an indication for genetic testing in the context of additional family history.

31432501
Familial pancreatic adenocarcinoma: A retrospective analysis of germline genetic testing in a French multicentre cohort
The rate of genetic diagnosis of French patients with familial pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is not known. We report germline genetic testing data from 133 index cases meeting criteria for familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) as well as 87 'FPC-like' index cases who did not fulfilled strict FPC definition but were evocative for a PDAC predisposition. The overall rate of genetic diagnosis (in BRCA1, BRCA2, CDKN2A, and ATM genes) was 8.3% in FPC patients and 4.6% in FPC-like patients, consistent with the literature in other populations. Genetic variants were also identified in FANCA and BAP1 genes, as well as in the CDKN2A p12 transcript. This pancreas-specific transcript is a known key player in driving pancreatic oncogenesis. This might be the first described case of a PDAC genetic predisposition due to a variant in this specific transcript.

31214711
Germline Pathogenic Variants in 7636 Japanese Patients With Prostate Cancer and 12 366 Controls
Background:
        
      
      Genetic testing has been conducted in patients with prostate cancer (PCa) using multigene panels, but no centralized guidelines for genetic testing exist. To overcome this limitation, we investigated the demographic and clinical characteristics of patients with pathogenic variants.

28825054
Prospective Genomic Profiling of Prostate Cancer Across Disease States Reveals Germline and Somatic Alterations That May Affect Clinical Decision Making
Purpose:
        
      
      A long natural history and a predominant osseous pattern of metastatic spread are impediments to the adoption of precision medicine in patients with prostate cancer. To establish the feasibility of clinical genomic profiling in the disease, we performed targeted deep sequencing of tumor and normal DNA from patients with locoregional, metastatic non-castrate, and metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).

22213089
Presence of ATM protein and residual kinase activity correlates with the phenotype in ataxia-telangiectasia: a genotype-phenotype study
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder with multisystem involvement and cancer predisposition, caused by mutations in the A-T mutated (ATM) gene. To study genotype-phenotype correlations, we evaluated the clinical and laboratory data of 51 genetically proven A-T patients, and additionally measured ATM protein expression and kinase activity. Patients without ATM kinase activity showed the classical phenotype. The presence of ATM protein, correlated with slightly better immunological function. Residual kinase activity correlated with a milder and essentially different neurological phenotype, absence of telangiectasia, normal endocrine and pulmonary function, normal immunoglobulins, significantly lower X-ray hypersensitivity in lymphocytes, and extended lifespan. In these patients, cancer occurred later in life and generally consisted of solid instead of lymphoid malignancies. The genotypes of severely affected patients generally included truncating mutations resulting in total absence of ATM kinase activity, while patients with milder phenotypes harbored at least one missense or splice site mutation resulting in expression of ATM with some kinase activity. Overall, the phenotypic manifestations in A-T show a continuous spectrum from severe classical childhood-onset A-T to a relatively mild adult-onset disorder, depending on the presence of ATM protein and kinase activity. Each patient is left with a tremendously increased cancer risk.

15390180
Cancer risk according to type and location of ATM mutation in ataxia-telangiectasia families
Epidemiological studies have indicated that ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) heterozygotes in AT families have an increased risk of cancer, particularly of breast cancer (BC). However, in BC case-control studies, no significant differences were found in the frequency of ATM mutations between patients and controls. In such studies missense mutations were found more frequently than truncating mutations, suggesting that the cancer risk depends on mutation type. To investigate this possibility, we assessed the risk of BC according to the type and position of the ATM truncating mutation in extended AT families. DNA or RNA that had been isolated from blood or buccal cells of AT children and their relatives was screened for ATM germ-line mutations using restriction endonuclease fingerprinting, the protein truncation test, fluorescence-assisted mismatch analysis, and direct sequencing. The standardized incidence ratio of cancer associated with ATM heterozygosity status and type of mutation was estimated. We tested for genotype-phenotype correlations by simulations, permuting mutations among parental branches. No significant difference was found in the relative risk of breast cancer or any other type of cancer based on mutation type. However, the occurrence of BC may be associated with truncating mutations in certain binding domains of the ATM protein (e.g., P53/BRCA1, beta-adaptin, and FAT domains; P = 0.006). In this limited sample set, the presence of missense or truncating ATM mutations was not associated with different cancer risks. The risk of BC appeared to be associated with the alteration of binding domains rather than with the length of the predicted ATM protein.

26846839
Monoallelic germline ATM mutation and organising pneumonia induced by radiation therapy to the breast


18321536
Rapid screen for truncating ATM mutations by PTT-ELISA
Mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive genetic disorder, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). Approximately 80% of ATM mutations found in A-T patients results in truncations, which can be detected by Protein Truncation Test (PTT). Conventional PTT uses SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to detect mobility of radiolabeled truncated protein fragments. In this study, we developed a non-radioactive Protein Truncation Test which utilizes an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (PTT-ELISA) to detect ATM mutations in eight overlapping fragments. N- and C-terminal epitopes (c-myc and V5, respectively) were introduced into transcription/translation products, which could then be detected by Sandwich ELISA. Using this assay, we screened 9 newly diagnosed A-T patients consecutively. Of the 18 expected mutations, 14 truncating mutations were independently identified by cDNA direct sequencing and/or DNA dHPLC analysis. PTT-ELISA detected all of these 14. Four mutations were novel. The PTT-ELISA provides a rapid method for detecting truncating mutations in large genes and should be considered prior to using more laborious or costly methods, such as direct sequencing.

25625042
ATM gene mutations in sporadic breast cancer patients from Brazil
Purpose:
        
      
      The Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a multifunctional kinase, which is linked to important cellular functions. Women heterozygous for ATM mutations have an estimated relative risk of developing breast cancer of 3.8. However, the pattern of ATM mutations and their role in breast cancer etiology has been controversial and remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated the frequency and spectrum of ATM mutations in a series of sporadic breast cancers and controls from the Brazilian population.

10873394
Ataxia-telangiectasia: phenotype/genotype studies of ATM protein expression, mutations, and radiosensitivity
Previous studies on a limited number of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients with detectable levels of intracellular ATM protein have suggested a genotype/phenotype correlation. We sought to elucidate this possible correlation by comparing ATM protein levels with mutation types, radiosensitivity, and clinical phenotype. In this study, Western blot analysis was used to measure ATM protein in lysates of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from 123 unrelated A-T patients, 10 A-T heterozygotes, and 10 patients with phenotypes similar to A-T. Our Western blot protocol can detect the presence of ATM protein in as little as 1 microg of total protein; at least 25 microg of protein was tested for each individual. ATM protein was absent in 105 of the 123 patients (85%); most of these patients had truncating mutations. The remaining subset of 18 patients (15%) had reduced levels of normal-sized ATM protein; missense mutations were more common in this subset. We used a colony survival assay to characterize the phenotypic response of the LCLs to radiation exposure; patients with or without detectable ATM protein were typically radiosensitive. Nine of 10 A-T heterozygotes also had reduced expression of ATM, indicating that both alleles contribute to ATM protein production. These data suggest that although ATM-specific mRNA is abundant in A-T cells, the abnormal ATM protein is unstable and is quickly targeted for degradation. We found little correlation between level of ATM protein and the type of underlying mutation, the clinical phenotype, or the radiophenotype.

34134972
Prevalence of monogenic disease in paediatric patients with a predominant respiratory phenotype
Objective:
        
      
      This study aimed to investigate the prevalence and clinical characteristics of monogenic disease in paediatric patients with a predominant respiratory phenotype.

22006793
Functional characterization and targeted correction of ATM mutations identified in Japanese patients with ataxia-telangiectasia
A recent challenge for investigators studying the progressive neurological disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is to identify mutations whose effects might be alleviated by mutation-targeted therapies. We studied ATM mutations in eight families of Japanese A-T patients (JPAT) and were able to identify all 16 mutations. The probands were compound heterozygotes in seven families, and one (JPAT2) was homozygous for a frameshift mutation. All mutations--four frameshift, two nonsense, four large genomic deletions, and six affecting splicing--were novel except for c.748C>T found in family JPAT6 and c.2639-384A>G found in family JPAT11/12. Using an established lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) of patient JPAT11, ATM protein was restored to levels approaching wild type by exposure to an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide designed to correct a pseudoexon splicing mutation. In addition, in an LCL from patient JPAT8/9, a heterozygous carrier of a nonsense mutation, ATM levels could also be partially restored by exposure to readthrough compounds (RTCs): an aminoglycoside, G418, and a novel small molecule identified in our laboratory, RTC13. Taken together, our results suggest that screening and functional characterization of the various sorts of mutations affecting the ATM gene can lead to better identification of A-T patients who are most likely to benefit from rapidly developing mutation-targeted therapeutic technologies.

19535770
Clinical spectrum of ataxia-telangiectasia in adulthood
Objective:
        
      
      To describe the phenotype of adult patients with variant and classic ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), to raise the degree of clinical suspicion for the diagnosis variant A-T, and to assess a genotype-phenotype relationship for mutations in the ATM gene.

28503720
Contribution of germline mutations in cancer predisposition genes to tumor etiology in young women diagnosed with invasive breast cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Although breast cancer in young women accounts for <10% of diagnoses annually, tumors in young patients exhibit more aggressive characteristics and higher mortality rates. Determination of the frequency of germline mutations in cancer predisposition genes is needed to improve the understanding of breast cancer etiology in young women.

31470354
Prevalence of germline predisposition gene mutations in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia: Genetic background of pediatric AML


23726790
Using next-generation sequencing as a genetic diagnostic tool in rare autosomal recessive neurologic Mendelian disorders
Next-generation sequencing was used to investigate 9 rare Chinese pedigrees with rare autosomal recessive neurologic Mendelian disorders. Five probands with ataxia-telangectasia and 1 proband with chorea-acanthocytosis were analyzed by targeted gene sequencing. Whole-exome sequencing was used to investigate 3 affected individuals with Joubert syndrome, nemaline myopathy, or spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay type. A list of known and novel candidate variants was identified for each causative gene. All variants were genetically verified by Sanger sequencing or quantitative polymerase chain reaction with the strategy of disease segregation in related pedigrees and healthy controls. The advantages of using next-generation sequencing to diagnose rare autosomal recessive neurologic Mendelian disorders characterized by genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity are demonstrated. A genetic diagnostic strategy combining the use of targeted gene sequencing and whole-exome sequencing with the aid of next-generation sequencing platforms has shown great promise for improving the diagnosis of neurologic Mendelian disorders.

10980530
Characterization of ATM mutations in 41 Nordic families with ataxia telangiectasia
The Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutation (ATM) gene is mutated in the rare recessive syndrome Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT), which is characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, and cancer predisposition. In this study, 41 AT families from Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden were screened for ATM mutations. The protein truncation test (PTT), fragment length and heteroduplex analyses of large (0.8-1.2 kb) cDNA fragments were used. In total, 67 of 82 (82%) of the disease-causing alleles were characterized. Thirty-seven unique mutations were detected of which 25 have not previously been reported. The mutations had five different consequences for the ATM transcript: mutations affecting splicing (43%); frameshift mutations (32%); nonsense mutations (16%); small in-frame deletions (5%); and one double substitution (3%). In 28 of the probands mutations were found in both alleles, in 11 of the probands only one mutated allele was detected, and no mutations were detected in two Finnish probands. One-third of the probands (13) were homozygous, whereas the majority of the probands (26) were compound heterozygote with at least one identified allele. Ten alleles were found more than once; one Norwegian founder mutation constituted 57% of the Norwegian alleles. Several sequence variants were identified, none of them likely to be disease-causing. Some of them even involved partial skipping of exons, leading to subsequent truncation of the ATM protein.

17393301
The spectrum of ATM missense variants and their contribution to contralateral breast cancer
Heterozygous carriers of ATM mutations are at increased risk of breast cancer. In this case-control study, we evaluated the significance of germline ATM missense variants to the risk of contralateral breast cancer (CBC). We have determined the spectrum and frequency of ATM missense variants in 443 breast cancer patients diagnosed before age 50, including 247 patients who subsequently developed CBC. Twenty-one per cent of the women with unilateral breast cancer and 17% of the women with CBC had at least one ATM germline missense variant, indicating no significant difference in variant frequency between these two groups. We have found that carriers of an ATM missense mutation, who were treated with radiotherapy for the first breast tumour, developed their second tumour on average in a 92-month interval compared to a 136-month mean interval for those CBC patients who neither received RT nor carried a germline variant, (p = 0.029). Our results indicate that the presence of ATM variants does not have a major impact on the overall risk of CBC. However, the combination of RT and (certain) ATM missense variants seems to accelerate tumour development.

10464642
An allelic variant at the ATM locus is implicated in breast cancer susceptibility
We have tested a simple procedure, disease association by locus stratification, for identifying breast cancer patients with pathogenetic allelic variants at several candidate loci. The strategy was based on the assumption of epistatic interactions of the candidates. We analyzed 66 independent cases from sib pairs affected with breast cancer that had previously been collected during an investigation of pathogenetic-allele-sharing at the HRAS1 mini-satellite locus. An exon 24 polymorphism of ATM, substituting arginine for proline was associated with breast cancer in these cases with an overall odds ratio of 4.5 (95% confidence interval, 1.2-20.5, nominal p = 0.02, 2-tail Fisher exact test). In the presence of a rare HRAS1 allele, the odds ratio increased to 6.9 (95% CI, 1.2-38.3, p = 0.03). Thus, our procedure identified at least one allelic variant of ATM associated with breast cancer, and indicated that the ATM locus may interact with HRAS1.

29778231
Clinical germline diagnostic exome sequencing for hereditary cancer: Findings within novel candidate genes are prevalent
Clinical diagnostic exome sequencing (DES) has been effective in diagnosing individuals with suspected genetic conditions; nevertheless little has been described regarding its clinical utility in individuals with a personal and family history of cancer. This study aimed to assess diagnostic yield and clinical characteristics of pediatric and adult patients undergoing germline DES for hereditary cancer. We retrospectively reviewed 2171 patients referred for DES; cases with a personal and/or family history of cancer were further studied. Of 39 cancer patients, relevant alterations were found in eight individuals (21%), including one (3%) positive pathogenic alteration within a characterized gene, two (5%) uncertain findings in characterized genes, and five (13%) alterations in novel candidate genes. Two of the 5 pediatric patients, undergoing testing, (40%) had findings in novel candidate genes, with the remainder being negative. We include brief case studies to illustrate the variety of challenging issues related to these patients. Our observations demonstrate utility of family-based exome sequencing in patients for suspected hereditary cancer, including familial co-segregation analysis, and comprehensive medical review. DES may be particularly useful when traditional approaches do not result in a diagnosis or in families with unique phenotypes. This work also highlights the importance and complexity of analysis of uncharacterized genes in exome sequencing for hereditary cancer.

9443866
Ataxia-telangiectasia: identification and detection of founder-effect mutations in the ATM gene in ethnic populations
To facilitate the evaluation of ATM heterozygotes for susceptibility to other diseases, such as breast cancer, we have attempted to define the most common mutations and their frequencies in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) homozygotes from 10 ethnic populations. Both genomic mutations and their effects on cDNA were characterized. Protein-truncation testing of the entire ATM cDNA detected 92 (66%) truncating mutations in 140 mutant alleles screened. The haplotyping of patients with identical mutations indicates that almost all of these represent common ancestry and that very few spontaneously recurring ATM mutations exist. Assays requiring minimal amounts of genomic DNA were designed to allow rapid screening for common ethnic mutations. These rapid assays detected mutations in 76% of Costa Rican patients (3), 50% of Norwegian patients (1), 25% of Polish patients (4), and 14% of Italian patients (1), as well as in patients of Amish/Mennonite and Irish English backgrounds. Additional mutations were observed in Japanese, Utah Mormon, and African American patients. These assays should facilitate screening for A-T heterozygotes in the populations studied.

9792409
ATM germline mutations in classical ataxia-telangiectasia patients in the Dutch population
Germline mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). In our study, we have determined the ATM mutation spectrum in 19 classical A-T patients, including some immigrant populations, as well as 12 of Dutch ethnic origin. Both the protein truncation test (PTT) and the restriction endonuclease fingerprinting (REF) method were used and compared for their detection efficiency, identifying 76% and 60% of the mutations, respectively. Most patients were found to be compound heterozygote. Seventeen mutations were distinct, of which 10 were not reported previously. Mutations are small deletions or point mutations frequently affecting splice sites. Moreover, a 16.7-kb genomic deletion of the 3' end of the gene, most likely a result of recombination between two LINE elements, was identified. The most frequently found mutation, identified in three unrelated Turkish A-T individuals, was previously described to be a Turkish A-T founder mutation. The presence of a founder mutation among relatively small ethnic population groups in Western Europe could indicate a high carrier frequency in such communities. In patients of Dutch ethnic origin, however, no significant founder effect could be identified. The observed genetic heterogeneity including the relative high percentage of splice-site mutations had no reflection on the phenotype. All patients manifested classical A-T and increased cellular radioresistant DNA synthesis.

28423363
Multiple-gene panel analysis in a case series of 255 women with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer
As new genes predisposing to breast (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC) are constantly emerging, the use of panels of genes analyzed by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) is increasing in clinical diagnostics. The identification of a large number of new germline mutations allows for deeper knowledge of cancer predisposition, although raising many questions about patient management.BC and OC patients recruited by our counseling service between 2012-2015 were included in this study. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and a panel of 94 genes involved in hereditary tumors was analyzed by NGS. Patient clinical features of BC and OC and cancer family history were collected and compared to the patient genetic profile.A total of 255 women were analyzed, 57 of whom had a pathogenic mutation in BRCA1/2 genes, and 17 carried pathogenic mutations in other genes, such as PALB2, ATM, BRIP1, RAD51D, MSH6, PPM1D, RECQL4, ERCC3, TSC2, SLX4 and other Fanconi anemia genes.Patients with a pathogenic mutation in genes other than BRCA1 and BRCA2 showed no significant difference from the BRCA1/2-mutated carriers with respect to age at diagnosis and clinical features, suggesting that mutations in other genes could pose a high risk of cancer development.These patients had a much higher percentage of bilateral breast cancer (BBC) and a lower rate of OC than BRCA-mutated patients and patients with no pathogenic mutations: as a consequence, the surveillance protocol should be customized to the patient genetic characteristics.

29506128
Prospective Evaluation of Germline Alterations in Patients With Exocrine Pancreatic Neoplasms
Background:
        
      
      Identification of pathogenic germline alterations (PGAs) has important clinical and therapeutic implications in pancreas cancer. We performed comprehensive germline testing (GT) in an unselected prospective cohort of patients with exocrine pancreatic neoplasms with genotype and phenotype association to facilitate identification of prognostic and/or predictive biomarkers and examine potential therapeutic implications.

28472652
De Novo Coding Variants Are Strongly Associated with Tourette Disorder
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and de novo variant detection have proven a powerful approach to gene discovery in complex neurodevelopmental disorders. We have completed WES of 325 Tourette disorder trios from the Tourette International Collaborative Genetics cohort and a replication sample of 186 trios from the Tourette Syndrome Association International Consortium on Genetics (511 total). We observe strong and consistent evidence for the contribution of de novo likely gene-disrupting (LGD) variants (rate ratio [RR] 2.32, p = 0.002). Additionally, de novo damaging variants (LGD and probably damaging missense) are overrepresented in probands (RR 1.37, p = 0.003). We identify four likely risk genes with multiple de novo damaging variants in unrelated probands: WWC1 (WW and C2 domain containing 1), CELSR3 (Cadherin EGF LAG seven-pass G-type receptor 3), NIPBL (Nipped-B-like), and FN1 (fibronectin 1). Overall, we estimate that de novo damaging variants in approximately 400 genes contribute risk in 12% of clinical cases. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

31771860
De Novo Damaging DNA Coding Mutations Are Associated With Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Overlap With Tourette's Disorder and Autism
Background:
        
      
      Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder with a genetic risk component, yet identification of high-confidence risk genes has been challenging. In recent years, risk gene discovery in other complex psychiatric disorders has been achieved by studying rare de novo (DN) coding variants.

16832357
ATM mutations that cause ataxia-telangiectasia are breast cancer susceptibility alleles
We screened individuals from 443 familial breast cancer pedigrees and 521 controls for ATM sequence variants and identified 12 mutations in affected individuals and two in controls (P = 0.0047). The results demonstrate that ATM mutations that cause ataxia-telangiectasia in biallelic carriers are breast cancer susceptibility alleles in monoallelic carriers, with an estimated relative risk of 2.37 (95% confidence interval (c.i.) = 1.51-3.78, P = 0.0003). There was no evidence that other classes of ATM variant confer a risk of breast cancer.

33558524
Germline mutational spectrum in Armenian breast cancer patients suspected of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) can be identified by genetic testing of cancer-causing genes. In this study, we identified a spectrum of genetic variations among 76 individuals of Armenian descent either with a family history of cancer or breast cancer before the age of 40. We screened 76 suspected HBOC patients and family members as well as four healthy controls using a targeted and hereditary comprehensive cancer panel (127 genes). We found 26 pathogenic (path) and 6 likely pathogenic (LPath)variants in 6 genes in 44 patients (58%); these variants were found in BRCA1 (17), BRCA2 (19), CHEK2 (4), PALB2 (2), and NBN (1). A few different variants were found in unrelated individuals; most notably, variant p.Trp1815Ter in the BRCA1 gene occurred in four unrelated patients. We did not find any known significant variants in five patients. Comprehensive cancer panel testing revealed pathogenic variants in cancer genes other than BRCA1 and BRCA2, suggesting that testing only BRCA1 and BRCA2 would have missed 8 out of 44 suspected HBOC patients (18%). These data also confirm that a comprehensive cancer panel testing approach could be an appropriate way to identify most of the variants associated with hereditary breast cancer.

10330348
Splicing defects in the ataxia-telangiectasia gene, ATM: underlying mutations and consequences
Mutations resulting in defective splicing constitute a significant proportion (30/62 [48%]) of a new series of mutations in the ATM gene in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) that were detected by the protein-truncation assay followed by sequence analysis of genomic DNA. Fewer than half of the splicing mutations involved the canonical AG splice-acceptor site or GT splice-donor site. A higher percentage of mutations occurred at less stringently conserved sites, including silent mutations of the last nucleotide of exons, mutations in nucleotides other than the conserved AG and GT in the consensus splice sites, and creation of splice-acceptor or splice-donor sites in either introns or exons. These splicing mutations led to a variety of consequences, including exon skipping and, to a lesser degree, intron retention, activation of cryptic splice sites, or creation of new splice sites. In addition, 5 of 12 nonsense mutations and 1 missense mutation were associated with deletion in the cDNA of the exons in which the mutations occurred. No ATM protein was detected by western blotting in any AT cell line in which splicing mutations were identified. Several cases of exon skipping in both normal controls and patients for whom no underlying defect could be found in genomic DNA were also observed, suggesting caution in the interpretation of exon deletions observed in ATM cDNA when there is no accompanying identification of genomic mutations.

24113346
The integration of next-generation sequencing panels in the clinical cancer genetics practice: an institutional experience
Purpose:
        
      
      The advent of next-generation sequencing for cancer susceptibility genes holds promise for clinical genetics application, but the practical issues surrounding integration of this testing into the clinical setting have not been well addressed. This article describes the clinical experience of genetic counselors in an academic and community setting with next-generation sequencing cancer panels.

18384426
ATM germline mutations in Spanish early-onset breast cancer patients negative for BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations
Heterozygous carriers of ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene) mutations have increased risk of breast cancer (BC). We have estimated the prevalence of mutations in the ATM gene among Spanish patients with early-onset BC. Forty-three patients diagnosed with BC before the age of 46 years, and negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, were analysed for the presence of ATM mutations. A total of 34 ATM sequence variants were detected: 1 deleterious mutation, 10 unclassified variants and 23 polymorphisms. One patient (2.3%) carried the ATM deleterious mutation (3802delG that causes ataxia telangiectasia in the homozygous state) and 13 patients carried the 10 ATM unclassified variants. The truncating mutation 3802delG and eight of the rare variants were not detected in a control group of 150 individuals. Different bioinformatic sequence analysis tools were used to evaluate the effects of the unclassified ATM changes on RNA splicing and function protein. This in silico analysis predicted that the missense variants 7653 T>C and 8156 G>A could alter the splicing by disrupting an exonic splicing enhancer motif and the 3763 T>G, 6314 G>C, and 8156 G>A variants would affect the ATM protein function. These are the initial results concerning the prevalence of germline mutations in the ATM gene among BC cases in a Spanish population, and they suggest that ATM mutations can confer increased susceptibility to early-onset BC.

12072877
Early diagnosis of ataxia-telangiectasia using radiosensitivity testing
Objectives:
        
      
      To utilize radiosensitivity testing to improve early diagnosis of patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T).

21833744
Characterisation of ATM mutations in Slavic Ataxia telangiectasia patients
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a genomic instability syndrome characterised, among others, by progressive cerebellar degeneration, oculocutaneous telangiectases, immunodeficiency, elevated serum alpha-phetoprotein level, chromosomal breakage, hypersensitivity to ionising radiation and increased cancer risk. This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene coding for serine/threonine protein kinase with a crucial role in response to DNA double-strand breaks. We characterised genotype and phenotype of 12 Slavic AT patients from 11 families. Mutation analysis included sequencing of the entire coding sequence, adjacent intron regions, 3'UTR and 5'UTR of the ATM gene and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the detection of large deletions/duplications at the ATM locus. The high incidence of new and individual mutations demonstrates a marked mutational heterogeneity of AT in the Czech Republic. Our data indicate that sequence analysis of the entire coding region of ATM is sufficient for a high detection rate of mutations in ATM and that MLPA analysis for the detection of deletions/duplications seems to be redundant in the Slavic population.

22520355
Ataxia-telangiectasia presenting with a novel immunodeficiency
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, and variable degrees of immunodeficiency. Immunologic evaluations of affected patients often reveal anomalies of humoral and cell-mediated immunity. We describe a case of ataxia-telangiectasia with an atypical immunodeficiency and a novel mutation in the ATM gene. The patient presented at age 3 years with a perineal cellulitis associated with profound neutropenia and T-cell lymphopenia. Serum immunoglobulin levels and antibody titers were normal. Neurologic evaluation revealed minimal hypotonia and wide-based gait, without other signs of cerebellar dysfunction. The alpha-fetoprotein level was elevated, and molecular genetic testing confirmed the diagnosis of ataxia-telangiectasia, uncovering a novel ATM gene mutation c.3931C>T (p.Gln1311X) in exon 28. This patient presents a unique immunologic pattern with normal immunoglobulin levels, significant lymphopenia, and profound neutropenia. The diagnosis of ataxia-telangiectasia should be considered in children presenting with gait disorder and immunologic defects, regardless of subtype and severity.

29439820
Germline DNA-repair Gene Mutations and Outcomes in Men with Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer Receiving First-line Abiraterone and Enzalutamide
Background:
        
      
      Inherited DNA-repair gene mutations are more prevalent in men with advanced prostate cancer than previously thought, but their clinical implications are not fully understood.

20826828
Missense variants in ATM in 26,101 breast cancer cases and 29,842 controls
Background:
        
      
      Truncating mutations in ATM have been shown to increase the risk of breast cancer but the effect of missense variants remains contentious.

32066632
Redefinition of familial intestinal gastric cancer: clinical and genetic perspectives
Background:
        
      
      Familial intestinal gastric cancer (FIGC) remains genetically unexplained and without testing/clinical criteria. Herein, we characterised the age of onset and disease spectrum of 50 FIGC families and searched for genetic causes potentially underlying a monogenic or an oligogenic/polygenic inheritance pattern.

28195569
Rare damaging variants in DNA repair and cell cycle pathways are associated with hippocampal and cognitive dysfunction: a combined genetic imaging study in first-episode treatment-naive patients with schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder where changes in both hippocampus and memory-related cognitive functions are central. However, the exact relationship between neurodevelopmental-genetic factors and hippocampal-cognitive dysfunction remains unclear. The general aim of our study is to link the occurrence of rare damaging mutations involved in susceptibility gene pathways to the structure and function of hippocampus in order to define genetically and phenotypically based subgroups in schizophrenia. In the present study, by analyzing the exome sequencing and magnetic resonance imaging data in 94 first-episode treatment-naive schizophrenia patients and 134 normal controls, we identified that a cluster of rare damaging variants (RDVs) enriched in DNA repair and cell cycle pathways was present only in a subgroup including 39 schizophrenic patients. Furthermore, we found that schizophrenic patients with this RDVs show increased resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) between left hippocampus (especially for left dentate gyrus) and left inferior parietal cortex, as well as decreased rsFC between left hippocampus and cerebellum. Moreover, abnormal rsFC was related to the deficits of spatial working memory (SWM; that is known to recruit the hippocampus) in patients with the RDVs. Taken together, our data demonstrate for the first time, to our knowledge, that damaging rare variants of genes in DNA repair and cell cycle pathways are associated with aberrant hippocampal rsFC, which was further relative to cognitive deficits in first-episode treatment-naive schizophrenia. Therefore, our data provide some evidence for the occurrence of phenotypic alterations in hippocampal and SWM function in a genetically defined subgroup of schizophrenia.

28657667
Germline genetic variants in men with prostate cancer and one or more additional cancers
Background:
        
      
      Prostate cancer has a significant heritable component, and rare deleterious germline variants in certain genes can increase the risk of the disease. The aim of the current study was to describe the prevalence of pathogenic germline variants in cancer-predisposing genes in men with prostate cancer and at least 1 additional primary cancer.

12362033
Constitutional alterations of the ATM gene in early onset sporadic breast cancer


10234507
Rapid and efficient ATM mutation detection by fluorescent chemical cleavage of mismatch: identification of four novel mutations
Mutations in the Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disease Ataxia Telangiectasia (A-T). A wide variety of mutations scattered across the entire coding region (9168bp) of ATM have been found, which presents a challenge in developing an efficient mutation screening strategy for detecting unknown mutations. Fluorescent chemical cleavage of mismatch (FCCM) is an ideal mutation screening method, offering a non-radioactive alternative to other techniques such as restriction endonuclease fingerprinting (REF). Using FCCM, we have developed an efficient, accurate and sensitive mutation detection method for screening RT-PCR products for ATM mutations. We have identified seven ATM mutations in five A-T families, four of which are previously unknown. We quantified ATM protein expression in four of the families and found variable ATM protein expression (0-6.4%), further evidence for mutant ATM protein expression in both classic and variant A-T patients. We conclude that FCCM offers a robust ATM mutation detection method and can be used to screen for ATM mutations in cancer-prone populations.

22527104
Predisposition gene identification in common cancers by exome sequencing: insights from familial breast cancer
The genetic component of breast cancer predisposition remains largely unexplained. Candidate gene case-control resequencing has identified predisposition genes characterised by rare, protein truncating mutations that confer moderate risks of disease. In theory, exome sequencing should yield additional genes of this class. Here, we explore the feasibility and design considerations of this approach. We performed exome sequencing in 50 individuals with familial breast cancer, applying frequency and protein function filters to identify variants most likely to be pathogenic. We identified 867,378 variants that passed the call quality filters of which 1,296 variants passed the frequency and protein truncation filters. The median number of validated, rare, protein truncating variants was 10 in individuals with, and without, mutations in known genes. The functional candidacy of mutated genes was similar in both groups. Without prior knowledge, the known genes would not have been recognisable as breast cancer predisposition genes. Everyone carries multiple rare mutations that are plausibly related to disease. Exome sequencing in common conditions will therefore require intelligent sample and variant prioritisation strategies in large case-control studies to deliver robust genetic evidence of disease association.

31227566
Two synchronous malignancies: nodular melanoma and renal cell carcinoma in a patient with an underlying germline BRCA2 mutation
Modernised genetic testing among patients with cancer has led to an increasing wealth of knowledge regarding cancer biology and aetiology. Furthermore, some germline mutations have the potential to direct therapeutic approaches as well. While BRCA1/2 mutations are well-established risk factors for breast and ovarian cancers, their impact on other cancers is less understood. We describe a patient with a germline BRCA2 mutation who developed synchronous melanoma and renal cell carcinoma, but responded well to treatment and is now cancer free.

31028847
Exome-based search for recurrent disease-causing alleles in Russian population
Exomes of 27 Russian subjects were analyzed for the presence of medically relevant alleles, such as protein-truncating variants (PTVs) in known recessive disease-associated genes and pathogenic missense mutations included in the ClinVar database. 36 variants (24 PTVs and 12 amino acid substitutions) were identified and then subjected to the analysis in 897 population controls. 9/36 mutations were novel, however only two of them (POLH c.490delG associated with xeroderma pigmentosum variant (XPV) and CATSPER1 c.859_860delCA responsible for spermatogenic failure) were shown to be recurrent. 27 out of 36 pathogenic alleles were already described in prior genetic studies; seven of them occurred only in the index cases, while 20 demonstrated evidence for persistence in Russian population. In particular, non-random occurrence was revealed for SERPINA1 c.1096G > A (alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency), C8B c.1282C > T and c.1653G > A (complement component 8B deficiency), ATP7B c.3207C > A (Wilson disease), PROP1 c.301_302delAG (combined pituitary hormone deficiency), CYP21A2 c.844G > T (non-classical form of adrenogenital syndrome), EYS c.1155T > A (retinitis pigmentosa), HADHA c.1528G > C (LCHAD deficiency), SCO2 c.418G > A (cytochrome c oxidase deficiency), OTOA c.2359G > T (sensorineural deafness), C2 c.839_866del (complement component 2 deficiency), ACADVL c.848T > C (VLCAD deficiency), TGM5 c.337G > T (acral peeling skin syndrome) and VWF c.2561 G > A (von Willebrand disease, type 2N). These data deserve to be considered in future medical genetic activities.

19691550
Founder effects for ATM gene mutations in Italian Ataxia Telangiectasia families
We screened ATM gene mutations in 104 Italian Ataxia-Telangiectasia patients from 91 unrelated families (detection rate 90%) and found 21 recurrent mutations in 63 families. The majority (67%) of patients were compound heterozygotes, while 33% were homozygotes. To determine the existence of common haplotypes and potential founder effects, we analyzed five microsatellite markers within and flanking the ATM gene. Haplotype analysis was carried out in 48/63 families harbouring 16 of the 21 recurrent mutations. Forty different haplotypes were detected in the 48 A-T families studied. We found that the majority of patients with the same recurrent mutation originated from the same geographical area. All but one recurrent mutation analyzed displayed a common haplotype suggesting a single origin that then spread to different geographical areas. The high number of different haplotypes does not allow the screening of ATM mutations by haplotype analysis alone in the Italian population. The finding of recurrent public mutations without founder effect suggests the existence of 'mild' hot spots of mutation located along the sequence of the ATM gene.

9872980
Strategies for mutational analysis of the large multiexon ATM gene using high-density oligonucleotide arrays
Mutational analysis of large genes with complex genomic structures plays an important role in medical genetics. Technical limitations associated with current mutation screening protocols have placed increased emphasis on the development of new technologies to simplify these procedures. High-density arrays of >90,000-oligonucleotide probes, 25 nucleotides in length, were designed to screen for all possible heterozygous germ-line mutations in the 9.17-kb coding region of the ATM gene. A strategy for rapidly developing multiexon PCR amplification protocols in DNA chip-based hybridization analysis was devised and implemented in preparing target for the 62 ATM coding exons. Improved algorithms for interpreting data from two-color experiments, where reference and test samples are cohybridized to the arrays, were developed. In a blinded study, 17 of 18 distinct heterozygous and 8 of 8 distinct homozygous sequence variants in the assayed region were detected accurately along with five false-positive calls while scanning >200 kb in 22 genomic DNA samples. Of eight heterozygous sequence changes found in more than one sample, six were detected in all cases. Five previously unreported sequence changes, not found by other mutational scanning methodologies on these same samples, were detected that led to either amino acid changes or premature truncation of the ATM protein. DNA chip-based assays should play a valuable role in high throughput sequence analysis of complex genes.

32338768
Rare germline genetic variants and risk of aggressive prostate cancer
Few genetic risk factors have been demonstrated to be specifically associated with aggressive prostate cancer (PrCa). Here, we report a case-case study of PrCa comparing the prevalence of germline pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) genetic variants in 787 men with aggressive disease and 769 with nonaggressive disease. Overall, we observed P/LP variants in 11.4% of men with aggressive PrCa and 9.8% of men with nonaggressive PrCa (two-tailed Fisher's exact tests, P = .28). The proportion of BRCA2 and ATM P/LP variant carriers in men with aggressive PrCa exceeded that observed in men with nonaggressive PrCa; 18/787 carriers (2.3%) and 4/769 carriers (0.5%), P = .004, and 14/787 carriers (0.02%) and 5/769 carriers (0.01%), P = .06, respectively. Our findings contribute to the extensive international effort to interpret the genetic variation identified in genes included on gene-panel tests, for which there is currently an insufficient evidence-base for clinical translation in the context of PrCa risk.

30816533
Clinical diagnosis and genetic counseling of atypical ataxia‑telangiectasia in a Chinese family
Ataxia‑telangiectasia (A‑T) is an autosomal recessive chromosome breakage disorder caused by mutations in the ATM serine/threonine kinase (ATM) gene. Typically, it presents in early childhood with progressive cerebellar dysfunction, accompanied by immunodeficiency and oculocutaneous telangiectasia. In the present study, the clinical and genetic findings of a Chinese family affected with A‑T in two live siblings, the proband (II‑2) and his elder brother (II‑1), as well as a fetus (II‑3) were reported. General health, clinical neurological, electrophysiological (motor and sensory nerve conduction) and magnetic resonance imaging evaluations revealed that patients II‑1 and II‑2 had similar symptoms of ataxia, dysarthria, conjunctival hyperemia and elevated serum α‑fetoprotein, whereas patient II‑1 had earlier A‑T onset at 2 years old and more serious problems with movement and intelligence. Targeted sequencing followed by Sanger sequencing revealed that these two patients carried the compound heterozygotes of a novel nonsense mutation c.5170G>T (p.Glu1724Ter) and a known nonsense mutation c.748C>T (p.Arg250Ter) in the ATM gene. Each mutation was inherited from an asymptomatic parent, which therefore confirmed the diagnosis of A‑T. Given this, proband's mother performed prenatal diagnosis in her third pregnancy. Unfortunately, the fetus had the same causal mutations as its siblings and the pregnancy was terminated. The findings of the present study expanded the mutation spectrum of the ATM gene and may help in understanding the genetic basis of A‑T, in order to guide genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

29482223
Efficacy of Exome-Targeted Capture Sequencing to Detect Mutations in Known Cerebellar Ataxia Genes
Importance:
        
      
      Molecular diagnosis is difficult to achieve in disease groups with a highly heterogeneous genetic background, such as cerebellar ataxia (CA). In many patients, candidate gene sequencing or focused resequencing arrays do not allow investigators to reach a genetic conclusion.

27433846
Inherited DNA-Repair Gene Mutations in Men with Metastatic Prostate Cancer
Background:
        
      
      Inherited mutations in DNA-repair genes such as BRCA2 are associated with increased risks of lethal prostate cancer. Although the prevalence of germline mutations in DNA-repair genes among men with localized prostate cancer who are unselected for family predisposition is insufficient to warrant routine testing, the frequency of such mutations in patients with metastatic prostate cancer has not been established.

31173646
The spectrum of mutations predisposing to familial breast cancer in Poland
To optimize genetic testing, it is necessary to establish the spectrum of breast cancer-predisposing mutations in particular ethnic groups. We studied 1,018 women with a strong family history for breast cancer (families with hereditary breast cancer; HBC) from genetically homogenous population of Poland, which is populated by ethnic Slavs, for mutations in 14 cancer susceptibility genes. Additionally, we compared the frequency of candidate pathogenic variants in breast cancer cases and controls. Germline mutations were detected in 512 of 1,018 probands with breast cancer (50.3%), including BRCA1/2 mutations detected in 420 families and non-BRCA mutations seen in 92 families. Thirteen BRCA1/2 founder mutations represented 84% of all BRCA1/2-positive cases. Seven founder mutations of CHEK2, PALB2, NBN and RECQL represented 73% of all non-BRCA-positive cases. Odds ratios for hereditary breast cancer were 87.6 for BRCA1, 15.4 for PALB2, 7.2 for CHEK2, 2.8 for NBN and 15.8 for RECQL. Odds ratios for XRCC2, BLM and BARD1 were below 1.3. In summary, we found that 20 founder mutations in six genes (BRCA1/2, CHEK2, PALB2, NBN and RECQL) are responsible for 82% of Polish hereditary breast cancer families. A simple test for these 20 mutations will facilitate genetic testing for breast cancer susceptibility in Poland. It may also facilitate genetic testing for breast cancer susceptibility in other Slavic populations and women of Slavic descent worldwide.

25980754
Identification of a Variety of Mutations in Cancer Predisposition Genes in Patients With Suspected Lynch Syndrome
Background & aims:
        
      
      Multigene panels are commercially available tools for hereditary cancer risk assessment that allow for next-generation sequencing of numerous genes in parallel. However, it is not clear if these panels offer advantages over traditional genetic testing. We investigated the number of cancer predisposition gene mutations identified by parallel sequencing in individuals with suspected Lynch syndrome.

15756685
Association of common ATM polymorphism with bilateral breast cancer
The ATM kinase has an essential role in maintaining genomic integrity. Loss of both ATM alleles results in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a rare autosomal recessive neuroimmunologic disorder associated with cancer susceptibility. Individuals heterozygous for germline ATM mutations have been reported to have an increased risk for malignancy, in particular, female breast cancer. In the current study, a full mutation analysis of the ATM gene was carried out in patients from 121 breast or breast-ovarian cancer families. We discovered that the combination of 5557G-->A in cis position with IVS38-8 T-->C was associated with bilateral breast cancer (OR = 10.2; 95% CI = 3.1-33.8; p = 0.001). As the 5557G-->A change has been reported to affect an exonic splicing enhancer, we hypothesized that the observed composite allele could have some effect on the correct splicing of exon 39. However, no aberrant transcripts were detected, but ATM expression levels of lymphoblast cell lines from heterozygous carriers of this combination allele were lower than from noncarriers (p = 0.09). Lowered gene expression levels may have direct influence on the activities in DNA damage recognition and response pathways, as well as other genome integrity maintenance functions. Based on the results, we propose a cancer risk-modifying effect for the ATM 5557G-->A, IVS38-8T-->C composite allele.

18701470
Variants in the ATM gene associated with a reduced risk of contralateral breast cancer
Between 5% and 10% of women who survive a first primary breast cancer will subsequently develop a second primary cancer in the contralateral breast. The Women's Environment, Cancer, and Radiation Epidemiology Study was designed to identify genetic and environmental determinants of contralateral breast cancer (CBC). In this study, 708 women with asynchronous CBC served as cases and 1,397 women with unilateral breast cancer served as controls. ATM, a serine-threonine kinase, controls the cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks, and has been implicated in breast cancer risk. Complete mutation screening of the ATM gene in all 2,105 study participants identified 240 distinct sequence variants; only 15 were observed in >1% of subjects. Among the rare variants, deleterious alleles resulting in loss of ATM function were associated with a nonsignificant increase in risk of CBC. In contrast, carriers of common variants had a statistically significant reduction in risk of CBC. Four of these 15 variants were individually associated with a significantly decreased risk of second primary breast cancer [c.1899-55T>G, rate ratio (RR), 0.5; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.3-0.8; c.3161C>G, RR, 0.5; 95% CI, 0.3-0.9; c.5558A>T, RR, 0.2; 95% CI, 0.1-0.6; c.6348-54T>C RR, 0.2; 95% CI, 0.1-0.8]. These data suggest that some alleles of ATM may exert an antineoplastic effect, perhaps by altering the activity of ATM as an initiator of DNA damage responses or a regulator of p53.

30363071
Ataxia Telangiectasia Gene Mutation in Isolated Segmental Dystonia Without Ataxia and Telangiectasia
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/page/journal/23301619/homepage/mdc312564-sup-v001_1.htm.

28123174
New diagnosis of atypical ataxia-telangiectasia in a 17-year-old boy with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and a novel ATM mutation
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive chromosome breakage disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Typically, it presents in early childhood with progressive cerebellar dysfunction along with immunodeficiency and oculocutaneous telangiectasia. An increased risk of malignancy is also associated with the syndrome and, rarely, may be the presenting feature in small children. We describe a 17-year-old boy with slurred speech, mild motor delays and learning disability diagnosed with atypical A-T in the setting of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Suspicion for A-T was raised after review of a peripheral blood karyotype demonstrating rearrangements involving chromosomes 7 and/or 14. The diagnosis was confirmed after molecular testing identified a novel homozygous missense variant in ATM (c.5585T>A; p.Leu1862His) that resulted in protein instability and abolished serine/threonine protein kinase activity. To our knowledge, this is the first report of concurrent A-T and lymphoid malignancy diagnoses in an older child or adult with only mild neurological disease. Our experience suggests that screening for the disorder should be considered in any individual with lymphoid malignancy and neurological findings, especially as radiation and certain chemotherapy protocols are contraindicated in A-T.

9450906
Identification of ATM mutations using extended RT-PCR and restriction endonuclease fingerprinting, and elucidation of the repertoire of A-T mutations in Israel
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, cancer predisposition, and radiation sensitivity. The responsible gene, ATM, has an extensive genomic structure and encodes a large transcript with a 9.2 kb open reading frame (ORF). A-T mutations are extremely variable and most of them are private. We streamlined a high throughput protocol for the search for ATM mutations. The entire ATM ORF is amplified in a single RT-PCR step requiring a minimal amount of RNA. The product can serve for numerous nested PCRs in which overlapping portions of the ORF are further amplified and subjected to restriction endonuclease fingerprinting (REF) analysis. Splicing errors are readily detectable during the initial amplification of each portion. Using this protocol, we identified 5 novel A-T mutations and completed the elucidation of the molecular basis of A-T in the Israeli population.

30982232
Germline mutation landscape of Chinese patients with familial breast/ovarian cancer in a panel of 22 susceptibility genes
Genetic testing for germline mutations in BRCA1/2 of patients with breast cancer (BC) is part of routine patient care. However, BRCA1/2 mutations account only for a fraction of familial BC. A custom panel of 22 gene sequencing was performed on each patient. Among the 481 female patients, 135 patients were detected to carry pathogenic (P)/likely pathogenic (LP) mutations (28.1%), which corresponded to 12 different cancer predisposition genes [14.6% (70/481) on BRCA1 gene, 5.0% (24/481) on BRCA2 gene, 8.5% (41/481) on non-BRCA1/2 genes]. Moreover, 24.7% (119/481) of patients had mutation of unknown significance (VUS) in these genes. The most common (8/481) pathogenic mutation is BRCA1 c.5470_5477del, while BRIP1 2392 C > T of patients was detected. All the mutations detected were mainly seen in the homologous recombinant repair pathway. Compared to BRCA2 mutation, BRCA1 mutation is higher in younger female patients (P < 0.01). Some pathogenic mutations were detected in the patients' familiy members without the past history of tumor and 92 novel mutations were detected (31 on BRCA including 2 P, 16 LP, 13 VUS; 61 on non-BRCA1/2 including 9 LP, 52 VUS). The detection rate of BRCA1/2 mutations was higher in patients with three or more cancer family members than those with one or two. However, the difference was not statistically different. The results suggest that multigene panel testing can increase mutation detection rate for high-risk BC patients. Detailed family history can help to categorize new mutations.

9792410
Ataxia-telangiectasia in the Japanese population: identification of R1917X, W2491R, R2909G, IVS33+2T-->A, and 7883del5, the latter two being relatively common mutations
We analyzed the data regarding six Japanese ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients from four unrelated families, at the DNA level, to search for possible common mutations in the Japanese population. Among eight mutant alleles in the four families, c. 4612del165 (exon 33 skipping) was identified in two alleles, and c. 5749A to T (R1917X), c. 7471T to C (W2491R), c.7883de15, and c. 8725A to G (R2909G) were identified in one allele each. We found no mutations in the other two alleles. The IVS33 + 2T-->A mutation was identified at the genomic level as the cause of exon 33 skipping. We also identified the IVS33 + 2T-->A mutation in a Japanese patient ATL105 who was previously found to be a homozygote of c. 4612del165. W2491R and R2909G mutations were not detected in more than 100 control Japanese alleles. The latter is located in a highly conserved PI-3 kinase domain and is a completely conserved residue among ATM-related proteins. Taken together with previously documented mutations in five other Japanese A-T patients, IVS33 + 2T-->A and 7883del5 were identified in four and five alleles, respectively, in a total of 18 mutant alleles of Japanese A-T patients. These results suggest that these two mutations are relatively common mutations in the Japanese population.

29665859
Morphology and genomic hallmarks of breast tumours developed by ATM deleterious variant carriers
Background:
        
      
      The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene is a moderate-risk breast cancer susceptibility gene; germline loss-of-function variants are found in up to 3% of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families who undergo genetic testing. So far, no clear histopathological and molecular features of breast tumours occurring in ATM deleterious variant carriers have been described, but identification of an ATM-associated tumour signature may help in patient management.

25452441
Inherited mutations in 17 breast cancer susceptibility genes among a large triple-negative breast cancer cohort unselected for family history of breast cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Recent advances in DNA sequencing have led to the development of breast cancer susceptibility gene panels for germline genetic testing of patients. We assessed the frequency of mutations in 17 predisposition genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, in a large cohort of patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) unselected for family history of breast or ovarian cancer to determine the utility of germline genetic testing for those with TNBC.

24090759
Novel mutations in ataxia telangiectasia and AOA2 associated with prolonged survival
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) and ataxia oculomotor apraxia type 2 (AOA2) are autosomal recessive ataxias caused by mutations in genes involved in maintaining DNA integrity. Lifespan in AT is greatly shortened (20s-30s) due to increased susceptibility to malignancies (leukemia/lymphoma). Lifespan in AOA2 is uncertain. We describe a woman with variant AT with two novel mutations in ATM (IVS14+2T>G and 5825C>T, p.A1942V) who died at age 48 with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Her mutations are associated with an unusually long life for AT and with a cancer rarely associated with that disease. We also describe two siblings with AOA2, heterozygous for two novel mutations in senataxin (3 bp deletion c.343-345 and 1398T>G, p.I466M) who have survived into their 70s, allowing us to characterize the longitudinal course of AOA2. In contrast to AT, we show that persons with AOA2 can experience a prolonged lifespan with considerable motor disability.

18807267
A nonsense mutation (E1978X) in the ATM gene is associated with breast cancer
Blood relatives of patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) have an increased risk to develop breast cancer. Allelic heterogeneity has made it difficult to confirm the role of ATM, the gene mutated in A-T, for breast cancer susceptibility in the general population. We now report that a nonsense mutation, p.E1978X (c.5932G>T), is both a classical A-T mutation and a breast cancer susceptibility allele in Eastern European populations. In a case-control study from Belarus, the E1978X mutation was identified in 10/1,891 Byelorussian breast cancer cases (0.5%) compared with 1/1,019 population controls [odds ratio (OR): 5.4; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 0.7-42.4, P = 0.1]. A second case-control study from Russia identified the E1978X mutation in two Russian and one Ukrainian cases out of 611 breast cancer patients but not in any Russian or Ukrainian controls (P = 0.1). In a third case-control study from Poland, E1978X was observed in 7/3,910 Polish breast cancer cases (0.2%) compared with 1/2,010 cancer-free population controls (OR: 3.6; 95% CI: 0.4-29.3, P = 0.4). In the combined analysis, E1978X was significantly associated with breast cancer (Mantel-Haenszel OR: 5.6, 95% CI: 1.3-21.4, P = 0.01). Taken together, this study provides first evidence for the association of a common A-T causing mutation with breast cancer in Eastern European founder populations.

29664460
A novel variant in ATM gene causes ataxia telangiectasia revealed by whole-exome sequencing
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by variants in ATM gene and characterized by progressive neurologic impairment, cerebellar ataxia, and oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia. Immunodeficiency with a recurrent sinopulmonary infections are observed in patients with A-T. Here, we report a novel stop codon variant, c.5944 C>T (p.Gln1982*), revealed by whole-exome sequencing in a 9-year old boy. He presented with recurrent upper respiratory tract infections, failure to thrive, developmental delay, ataxic gait, and bulbar telangiectasia.

25330149
Mutations predisposing to breast cancer in 12 candidate genes in breast cancer patients from Poland
A number of genes other than BRCA1 and BRCA2 have been associated with breast cancer predisposition, and extended genetic testing panels have been proposed. It is of interest to establish the full spectrum of deleterious mutations in women with familial breast cancer.We performed whole-exome sequencing of 144 women with familial breast cancer and negative for 11 Polish founder mutations in BRCA1, CHEK2 and NBS1, and we evaluated the sequences of 12 known breast cancer susceptibility genes. A truncating mutation in a breast cancer gene was detected in 24 of 144 women (17%) with familial breast cancer. A BRCA2 mutation was detected in 12 cases, a (non-founder) BRCA1 mutation was detected in 5 cases, a PALB2 mutation was detected in 4 cases and an ATM mutation was detected in 2 cases. Polish women with familial breast cancer who are negative for founder mutations in BRCA1, CHEK2 and NBS1 should be fully screened for mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2. The PALB2 founder mutation c.509_519delGA should be included in the panel of Polish founder mutations.

14970866
Cellular responses to ionising radiation of AT heterozygotes: differences between missense and truncating mutation carriers
It has been estimated that approximately 1% of the general population are ataxia telangiectasia (AT) mutated (ATM) heterozygotes. The ATM protein plays a central role in DNA-damage response pathways; however, the functional consequences of the presence of either heterozygous truncating or missense mutations on ATM expression and the ionising radiation (IR)-induced cellular phenotype remain to be fully determined. To investigate this relationship, the ATM mRNA and protein levels and several cellular end points were characterised in 14 AT heterozygote (AT het) lymphoblastoid cell lines, compared to normal and AT homozygote lines. The AT het cell lines displayed a wide range of IR-induced responses: despite lower average levels of ATM mRNA and protein expression compared to normal cells, 13 out of 14 were capable of phosphorylating the ATM substrates p53-ser15 and Chk2, leading to a normal cell cycle progression after irradiation. However, cell survival was lower than in the normal cell lines. The presence of a missense compared to a truncating mutation was associated with lower cell survival after exposure to 2 Gy irradiation (P=0.005), and a higher level of ATM mRNA expression (P=0.047). Our results underline the difficulty in establishing a reliable test for determining ATM heterozygosity.

30067863
Prospective study of germline genetic testing in incident cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma
Background:
        
      
      The objective of this study was to investigate the prevalence of pathogenic germline variants (PGVs) in 32 cancer susceptibility genes in individuals with newly diagnosed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). A key secondary objective was to evaluate how often PGVs would have been undetected with existing genetic testing criteria.

8659541
Ataxia-telangiectasia: mutations in ATM cDNA detected by protein-truncation screening
We have examined the distal half of the ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) gene transcript for truncation mutations in 48 A-T affecteds. We found 21 mutations; 4 of the mutations were seen in more than one individual. Genotyping of the individuals sharing mutations, by using nearby microsatellite markers, established that three of the four groups shared common haplotypes, indicating that these were probably founder effects, not public mutations. The one public mutation was found in two American families, one of Ashkenazi Jewish background and the other not. Most truncations deleted the PI3-kinase domain, although some exceptions to this were found in patients with typical A-T phenotypes. All patients not previously known to be consanguineous were found to be compound heterozygotes when mutations could be identified--that is, normal and abnormal protein segments were seen on SDS-PAGE gels. All 48 patients gave RT-PCR products, indicating the presence of relatively stable mRNAs despite their mutations. These results suggest that few public mutations or hot spots can be expected in the A-T gene and that epidemiological studies of A-T carrier status and associated health risks will have to be designed around populations with frequent founder-effect mutations, despite the obvious limitations of this approach.

31319225
Clinical utility of a targeted next generation sequencing panel in severe and pediatric onset Mendelian diseases
Next generation sequencing has provided great advancements in genetic diagnosis of Mendalian disorders. Simultaneous sequencing of many genes has become increasingly cheaper and faster. Recently, a number of gene panels have been established for the diagnosis of specific disease groups. The aim of this study is to evaluate the utility of an inherited disease panel in pediatric onset Mendelian diseases. Two hundred and seventeen probands and 10 carriers molecularly analyzed using a TruSight Inherited Disease® Panel which included 552 genes responsible for pediatric onset Mendelian disorders, were enrolled in the study. The clinical phenotype, sequencing data, pretest and posttest diagnoses were evaluated. The patients in the study were classified into two groups. Group 1 (n:209) included the patients having a clinical diagnosis prior to molecular analysis. Group 2 (n:18) included the patients undiagnosed clinically prior to molecular analysis. Targeted panel provided a molecular diagnosis in 37% (84 of 227 cases) of all cases. The molecular diagnostic rate was 40.2% in patients with a specific prior clinical diagnosis. However, in patients having no primary clinical diagnosis no pathogenic variants were found. In 14 patients, a molecular diagnosis differing from the established clinical diagnosis was made. In conclusion, a targeted panel covering a high number of genes responsible for broad phenotypic spectrum can provide improved levels of diagnosis in patients with pediatric onset Mendelian diseases. A careful clinical evaluation of patients prior to the application of a next generation sequencing method leads to the best alternative approach for a conclusive molecular diagnosis.

22345219
Variant ataxia-telangiectasia presenting as primary-appearing dystonia in Canadian Mennonites
Objective:
        
      
      To compare the phenotype of primary-appearing dystonia due to variant ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) with that of other dystonia ascertained for genetics research.

19440741
Epidemiological, clinical, paraclinical and molecular study of a cohort of 102 patients affected with autosomal recessive progressive cerebellar ataxia from Alsace, Eastern France: implications for clinical management
While Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) and ataxia telangiectasia (AT) are known to be the two most frequent forms of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA), knowledge on the other forms of ARCA has been obtained only recently, and they appear to be rarer. Little is known about the epidemiological features and the relative frequency of the ARCAs and only few data are available about the comparative features of ARCAs. We prospectively studied 102 suspected ARCA cases from Eastern France (including 95 from the Alsace region) between 2002 and 2008. The diagnostic procedure was based on a sequential strategic scheme. We examined the clinical, paraclinical and molecular features of the large cohort of patients and compared features and epidemiology according to molecular diagnosis. A molecular diagnosis could be established for 57 patients; 36 were affected with FRDA, seven with ataxia plus oculomotor apraxia type 2 (AOA2), four with AT, three with ataxia plus oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1), three with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome, two with autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS), one with ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) and one with autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia type 2 (ARCA2). The group of patients with no identified mutation had a significantly lower spinocerebellar degeneration functional score corrected for disease duration (SDFS/DD ratio; p = 0.002) and comprised a significantly higher proportion of cases with onset after 20 years (p < 0.01). Extensor plantar reflexes were rarer and cerebellar atrophy was more frequent in the group of patients with a known non-Friedreich ARCA compared to all other patients (p < 0.0001 and p = 0.0003, respectively). Lower limb areflexia and electroneuromyographic evidences of peripheral neuropathy were more frequent in the Friedreich ataxia group than in the group with a known non-Friedreich ataxia and were more frequent in the later group than in the group with no identified mutation (p = 0.0001 and p = 0.01, respectively). The overall prevalence of ARCA in Alsace is 1/19,000. We can infer the prevalence of FRDA in Alsace to be 1/50,000 and infer that AT is approximately eight times less frequent than FRDA. MSS, AOA2 and ARSACS appear only slightly less frequent than AT. Despite the broad variability of severity, Friedreich ataxia patients are clinically distinct from the other forms of ARCA. Patients with no identified mutation have more often a pure cerebellar degenerative disease or a spastic ataxia phenotype. It appears that ARCA cases can be divided into two major groups of different prognosis, an early-onset group with a highly probable genetic cause and an adult-onset group with better prognosis for which a genetic cause is more difficult to prove but not excluded. ARCAs are rare, early-disabling and genetically heterogeneous diseases dominated by FRDA. Several of the recently identified ARCAs, such as AVED, ARSACS, AOA1, AOA2 and MSS, have a prevalence close to AT and should be searched for extensively irrespective of ethnic origins. The strategic scheme is a useful tool for the diagnosis of ARCAs in clinical practice.

31403082
Adult-onset variant ataxia-telangiectasia diagnosed by exome and cDNA sequencing


20480175
Homozygosity for c 6325T>G transition in the ATM gene causes an atypical, late-onset variant form of ataxia-telangiectasia


12697903
Oligonucleotide microarrays demonstrate the highest frequency of ATM mutations in the mantle cell subtype of lymphoma
Mutations have been described in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene in small numbers of cases of lymphoid neoplasia. However, surveys of the ATM mutation status in lymphoma have been limited due to the large size (62 exons) and complex mutational spectrum of this gene. We have used microarray-based assays with 250,000 oligonucleotides to screen lymphomas from 120 patients for all possible ATM coding and splice junction mutations. The subtypes included were diffuse large B cell, mantle cell, immunoblastic large B cell, follicular, posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder, and peripheral T cell lymphoma. We found the highest percentage of ATM mutations within the mantle cell (MCL) subtype (43%, 12 of 28 cases), followed by a lower level (10% of cases) in the other subtypes. A frame-shift ATM mutation was found in one peripheral T cell lymphoma patient. In six MCL cases examined, four ATM variants were due to somatic mutation in the tumor cells whereas two others seemed to be germ-line in origin. There was no difference in p53 mutation status in the ATM mutant and wild-type groups of MCL. There was no statistically significant difference in the median overall survival of patients with wild-type vs. mutated ATM in MCL. Additional mutational and functional analyses are needed to determine whether ATM mutations contribute to the development and progression of MCL or are just the consequence of genomic instability in MCL.

31422574
Prevalence of genetic susceptibility for breast and ovarian cancer in a non-cancer related study population: secondary germline findings from a Swiss single centre cohort
Background:
        
      
      Since the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies, organised germline screening, independent of the personal and family cancer history, has been frequently proposed. Since ethnic and geographic populations significantly differ in their mutation spectra and prevalence, one critical prerequisite would be the knowledge of the expected carrier frequencies.

30482293
A multi-gene panel beyond BRCA1/BRCA2 to identify new breast cancer-predisposing mutations by a picodroplet PCR followed by a next-generation sequencing strategy: a pilot study
By analyzing multiple gene panels, next-generation sequencing is more effective than conventional procedures in identifying disease-related mutations that are useful for clinical decision-making. Here, we aimed to test the efficacy of an 84 genes customized-panel in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative patients. Twenty-four patients were enrolled in this study. DNA libraries were prepared using a picodroplet PCR-based approach and sequenced with the MiSeq System. Highly putative pathogenic mutations were identified in genes other than the commonly tested BRCA1/2: 2 pathogenic mutations one in TP53 and one in MUTYH; 2 missense variants in MSH6 and ATM, respectively; 2 frameshift variants in KLLN, and ATAD2, respectively; an intronic variant in ANPEP, and 3 not functionally known variants (a frameshift variant in ATM a nonsense variant in ATM and a missense variant in NFE2L2). Our results show that this molecular screening will increase diagnostic sensitivity leading to a better risk assessment in breast cancer patients and their families. This strategy could also reveal genes that have a higher penetrance for breast and ovarian cancers by matching gene mutation with familial and clinical data, thereby increasing information about hereditary breast and ovarian cancer genetics and improving cancer prevention measures or therapeutic approaches.

32778766
Expanding cancer predisposition genes with ultra-rare cancer-exclusive human variations
It is estimated that up to 10% of cancer incidents are attributed to inherited genetic alterations. Despite extensive research, there are still gaps in our understanding of genetic predisposition to cancer. It was theorized that ultra-rare variants partially account for the missing heritable component. We harness the UK BioBank dataset of ~ 500,000 individuals, 14% of which were diagnosed with cancer, to detect ultra-rare, possibly high-penetrance cancer predisposition variants. We report on 115 cancer-exclusive ultra-rare variations and nominate 26 variants with additional independent evidence as cancer predisposition variants. We conclude that population cohorts are valuable source for expanding the collection of novel cancer predisposition genes.

29335925
Germline deleterious mutations in genes other than BRCA2 are infrequent in male breast cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare cancer entity, with mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes accounting for ~ 10% of patients. Multiple-gene sequencing has already entered clinical practice for female breast cancer, whereas the performance of panel testing in MBC has not been studied extensively. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical utility of panel testing for MBC, by the largest gene panel used so far, through investigation of patients deriving from a population with known founder effects.

21965147
New mutations in the ATM gene and clinical data of 25 AT patients
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, chromosomal instability, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. The gene mutated in the patients, ATM, encodes a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase family proteins. The ATM protein has a key role in the cellular response to DNA damage. Truncating and splice site mutations in ATM have been found in most patients with the classical AT phenotype. Here we report of our extensive ATM mutation screening on 25 AT patients from 19 families of different ethnic origin. Previously unknown mutations were identified in six patients including a new homozygous missense mutation, c.8110T>C (p.Cys2704Arg), in a severely affected patient. Comprehensive clinical data are presented for all patients described here along with data on ATM function generated by analysis of cell lines established from a subset of the patients.

32095276
Dystonia in Ataxia Telangiectasia: A Case Report with Novel Mutations
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a common, genetically inherited cause of early childhood-onset ataxia that is classically characterized by progressive cerebellar malfunction, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, genome instability, and immunodeficiency. There is vast phenotype variation in patients with A-T and recently, dystonia, an extrapyramidal movement disorder. Here, we report the case of a 10-year-old girl who had experienced repeated diarrhea and mild gait ataxia since the age of two years. At age seven, ataxia and ocular telangiectasia were evident and immunoglobulin level assessment showed hyper IgM immune phenotype, thus a diagnosis of A-T was made based on clinical and laboratory findings, and she was started on intravenous immunoglobulin therapy. Generalized dystonia appeared when she was 10-years-old. Molecular analysis revealed two heterozygous mutations, c.6259delG and c.6658C>T, in the ATM gene of which one (c.6259delG) is novel. Dystonia can be part of the clinical picture in the A-T disorder and may even mask ataxia. This should be considered as a major feature mainly in variant A-T, which may occur without general ataxia and may be misdiagnosed in adults with primary dystonia.

16380133
Mutation analysis of the ATM gene in two Chinese patients with ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, elevated alpha-fetoprotein level, chromosomal instability, predisposition to cancer, and radiation sensitivity. Although a lot of mutations in the ATM gene have been described, there is still no report about ATM mutations in Chinese population. Using a molecular approach, we screened for ATM mutations in two patients from two unrelated Chinese families. 100 normal controls were analyzed to exclude possibility of polymorphism. Two novel mutations in the ATM gene were identified. The first one is a novel, homozygous, 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) missense mutation. The second one is a compound heterozygous mutation, which consists of a novel, 610G>T (Gly204Stop) nonsense mutation, combined with a previously reported, 6679C>T (Arg2227Cys) missense mutation. The transversions 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) and 610G>T (Gly204Stop) are not localized either in the conserved PI-3 kinase domain or in the other domains of the ATM protein. The phenotypic features were characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular telangiectasia, elevated alpha-fetoprotein level, immunodeficiency (agammaglo-bulinemia and T-cell defect), and rearrangements of chromosomes 7 and 14; brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, brain SPECT showed cerebellar regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) hypoperfusion. To our knowledge, this is the first report of ATM mutations in Mainland China, in which the transversions 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) and 610G>T (Gly204Stop) are two novel, disease-causing mutations.

12673804
ATM gene alterations in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemias
Hereditary ATM gene mutations cause ataxia-telangiectasia, a pleiotropic disorder associated with a high incidence of lymphoid malignancies. Acquired ATM alterations have been described in sporadic lymphoproliferative disorder suggesting that the ATM gene contributes to lymphomagenesis. To assess the prevalence of genomic ATM alterations in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL), we explored a series of 57 sporadic ALL cases (26 B-precursor ALL and 31 T-ALL) using DHPLC (Denaturing High-Performance Liquid Chromatography). We identified 28 distinct genomic ATM alterations in 14 patients (25%). Ten of them were scored as probably biologically significant and appear to be associated with a high risk of relapse (P<0.01). Six alterations of potential biological significance were observed in 5 cases of B-precursor ALL (19%), while 5 were found in 3 cases of T-ALL (10%). In two cases of B-precursor ALL, the ATM alterations were found in the germline, indicating an ATM carrier status. We report here the high prevalence of genomic ATM alterations in childhood ALL. Our observations lend further support to the postulated contribution of ATM in lymphomagenesis.

17540590
Alpha fetoprotein is increasing with age in ataxia-telangiectasia
The elevated serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) concentration in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients has been known for decades, but the individual variation of AFP levels over time has not been studied. We have followed 12 patients (five girls and seven boys) for 1-12 years (mean 5.5 years) measuring in each patient AFP 2-8 (mean 4) times. Serum AFP levels were increased in all patients, mean 168.7 (range 40-373) kU/L, and without significant differences between the patients. There was a significant age related difference in the serum AFP level. A positive linear relationship (r=0.61, p=0.04) could be found between AFP level and age. Albumin levels were within normal range and did not change with age. Four patients had slightly increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels. None of the patients had serological evidence of infectious hepatitis, and none had increased levels of carcinoembryonic antigen. Repeated standardized observations of gait function revealed no major difference in neurological deterioration between our patients. All had classical A-T disease and mainly truncating mutations; 21 out of 24 possible mutations were either frameshift or nonsense. Four were homozygous for the Norwegian ATM founder mutation. No correlation between serum AFP levels and the different ATM genotypes could be found. We conclude that serum AFP is not only elevated, but also is continuously increasing with age in patients with classical A-T disease.

29961768
Germline cancer susceptibility gene variants, somatic second hits, and survival outcomes in patients with resected pancreatic cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Germline variants in double-strand DNA damage repair (dsDDR) genes (e.g., BRCA1/2) predispose to pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and may predict sensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy and poly(ADP) ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. We sought to determine the prevalence and significance of germline cancer susceptibility gene variants in PDAC with paired somatic and survival analyses.

23322442
Molecular defects in Moroccan patients with ataxia-telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive disease, affecting neurologic and immune system. Numerous mutations are described in the ATM gene in several populations. However, in Morocco, few data are available concerning this condition. Our main goal is to determine clinical, immunological, and molecular presentation of Moroccan patients with AT. We screened 27 patients, out of 22 unrelated families, for ATM gene mutations. All our patients showed ataxia, ocular telangiectasia, and immunodeficiency, as well as elevated serum alphafetoprotein levels. Mean age at diagnosis was 5.51 years, and consanguinity rate was 81.8 %. Mean age at onset was 2.02 years, and mean time to diagnosis was 3.68 years. We found 14 different mutations in 19 unrelated families, of which 7 were not reported. Our results showed that c.5644C>T mutation was the most common in our series. However, further studies are required to demonstrate a founder effects on ATM gene in Moroccan patients, who showed mutational heterogeneity otherwise. Our data indicate that direct sequencing of coding exons is sufficient for a high detection rate in ATM in Moroccan population.

17376192
Ocular findings in Norwegian patients with ataxia-telangiectasia: a 5 year prospective cohort study
Purpose:
        
      
      To describe the outcome of ophthalmologic examination of 10 Norwegian children with ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) followed through 5 years.

30888062
Two novel variants in the ATM gene causing ataxia-telangiectasia, including a duplication of 90 kb: Utility of targeted next-generation sequencing in detection of copy number variation
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular apraxia, immunodeficiency, telangiectasia, elevated serum α-fetoprotein concentration, radiosensitivity and cancer predisposition. Classical A-T is caused by biallelic variants on ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) gene, leading to a loss of function of the protein kinase ATM, involved in DNA damage repair. Atypical presentations can be found in A-T-like disease or in Nijmegen breakage syndrome, caused by deficiency of mre11 or nibrin proteins, respectively. In this report, we present the genetic characterization of a 4-year-old female with clinical diagnosis of A-T. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed two novel heterozygous mutations in the ATM gene: a single-nucleotide variant (SNV) at exon 47 (NM_000051.3:c.6899G > C; p.Trp2300Ser) and ∼90 kb genomic duplication spanning exons 17-61, NG_009830.1:g.(41245_49339)_(137044_147250)dup. These findings were validated by Sanger sequencing and MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) analysis respectively. Familial segregation study confirmed that the two variants are inherited, and the infant is a compound heterozygote. Thus, our study expands the spectrum of ATM pathogenic variants and demonstrates the utility of targeted NGS in the detection of copy number variation.

12655570
Six novel ATM mutations in Italian patients with classical ataxia-telangiectasia
Mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive syndrome Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT). In a group of 26 classical AT Italian patients studied by protein truncation test (PTT), we identified six new mutations, never reported so far. Mutations -spread over the entire ATM coding sequence with not clear "hot-spot"- are four frameshifts (2192_2193insA, 3110delC, 7150delA, 8368delA), one splice site alteration (8850G>T, causing exon 63 skipping) and one nonsense change (6913C>T, Q2305X). The identification of ATM gene mutations is important for understanding the molecular basis of the disease, and is essential for diagnosis and genetic counseling.

18573109
Pathogenic ATM mutations occur rarely in a subset of multiple myeloma patients
Ataxia Telangiectasia (A-T) patients have biallelic inactivation of the ATM gene and exhibit a 200-fold-increased frequency of lymphoid tumours. ATM mutations have been found in a number of adult lymphoid malignancies but there is no data on the occurrence of ATM mutations in multiple myeloma tumours. The purpose of our work was to investigate the occurrence of ATM mutations in multiple myeloma and to this end we screened 45 sporadic cases for ATM mutations using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography analysis and DNA sequencing. Pathogenic ATM mutations were identified in 2/45 of the myelomas compared with a published estimate of ATM mutant allele frequency in the UK population of 2/521 (P = 0.033). One was the missense mutation 7181C>T which was then modelled in an expression system and the S2394L protein shown to have no ATM kinase activity. The second myeloma had the pathogenic ATM splice site mutation IVS40-1G>C leading to loss of exon 41. We also report a 48-year-old ataxia telangiectasia patient who developed multiple myeloma. Taken together our study suggests that ATM mutation may play a role in the pathogenesis of a subset of multiple myelomas.

29036293
Rare germline variants in known melanoma susceptibility genes in familial melanoma
Known high-risk cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM) genes account for melanoma risk in <40% of melanoma-prone families, suggesting the existence of additional high-risk genes or perhaps a polygenic mechanism involving multiple genetic modifiers. The goal of this study was to systematically characterize rare germline variants in 42 established melanoma genes among 144 CMM patients in 76 American CMM families without known mutations using data from whole-exome sequencing. We identified 68 rare (<0.1% in public and in-house control datasets) nonsynonymous variants in 25 genes. We technically validated all loss-of-function, inframe insertion/deletion, and missense variants predicted as deleterious, and followed them up in 1, 559 population-based CMM cases and 1, 633 controls. Several of these variants showed disease co-segregation within families. Of particular interest, a stopgain variant in TYR was present in five of six CMM cases/obligate gene carriers in one family and a single population-based CMM case. A start gain variant in the 5'UTR region of PLA2G6 and a missense variant in ATM were each seen in all three affected people in a single family, respectively. Results from rare variant burden tests showed that familial and population-based CMM patients tended to have higher frequencies of rare germline variants in albinism genes such as TYR, TYRP1, and OCA2 (P < 0.05). Our results suggest that rare nonsynonymous variants in low- or intermediate-risk CMM genes may influence familial CMM predisposition, warranting further investigation of both common and rare variants in genes affecting functionally important pathways (such as melanogenesis) in melanoma risk assessment.

8755918
Mutations associated with variant phenotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia
We have identified 14 families with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) in which mutation of the ATM gene is associated with a less severe clinical and cellular phenotype (approximately 10%-15% of A-T families identified in the United Kingdom). In 10 of these families, all the homozygotes have a 137-bp insertion in their cDNA caused by a point mutation in a sequence resembling a splice-donor site. The second A-T allele has a different mutation in each patient. We show that the less severe phenotype in these patients is caused by some degree of normal splicing, which occurs as an alternative product from the insertion-containing allele. The level of the 137-bp PCR product containing the insertion was lowest in two patients who showed a later onset of cerebellar ataxia. A further four families who do not have this insertion have been identified. Mutations detected in two of four of these are missense mutations, normally rare in A-T patients. The demonstration of mutations giving rise to a slightly milder phenotype in A-T raises the interesting question of what range of phenotypes might occur in individuals in whom both mutations are milder. One possibility might be that individuals who are compound heterozygotes for ATM mutations are more common than we realize.

11830610
Dominant negative ATM mutations in breast cancer families
Background:
        
      
      The ATM gene encoding a putative protein kinase is mutated in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), an autosomal recessive disorder with a predisposition for cancer. Studies of A-T families suggest that female heterozygotes have an increased risk of breast cancer compared with noncarriers. However, neither linkage analyses nor mutation studies have provided supporting evidence for a role of ATM in breast cancer predisposition. Nevertheless, two recurrent ATM mutations, T7271G and IVS10-6T-->G, reportedly increase the risk of breast cancer. We examined these two ATM mutations in a population-based, case-control series of breast cancer families and multiple-case breast cancer families.

8808599
A high frequency of distinct ATM gene mutations in ataxia-telangiectasia
The clinical features of the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) include a progressive cerebellar ataxia, hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation, and an increased susceptibility to malignancies. Epidemiological studies have suggested that AT heterozygotes may also be at increased risk for malignancy, possibly as a consequence of radiation exposure. A gene mutated in AT patients (ATM) has recently been isolated, making mutation screening in both patients and the general population possible. Because of the relatively large size of the ATM gene, the design of screening programs will depend on the types and distribution of mutations in the general population. In this report, we describe 30 mutations identified in a panel of unrelated AT patients and controls. Twenty-five of the 30 were distinct, and most patients were compound heterozygotes. The most frequently detected mutation was found in three different families and had previously been reported in five others. This corresponds to a frequency of 8% of all reported ATM mutations. Twenty-two of the alterations observed would be predicted to lead to protein truncation at sites scattered throughout the molecule. Two fibroblast cell lines, which displayed normal responses to ionizing radiation, also proved to be heterozygous for truncation mutations of ATM. These observations suggest that the carrier frequency of ATM mutations may be sufficiently high to make population screening practical. However, such screening may need to be done prospectively, that is, by searching for new mutations rather than by screening for just those already identified in AT families.

24556621
Frequent germline deleterious mutations in DNA repair genes in familial prostate cancer cases are associated with advanced disease
Background:
        
      
      Prostate cancer (PrCa) is one of the most common diseases to affect men worldwide and among the leading causes of cancer-related death. The purpose of this study was to use second-generation sequencing technology to assess the frequency of deleterious mutations in 22 tumour suppressor genes in familial PrCa and estimate the relative risk of PrCa if these genes are mutated.

32994724
Targeted sequencing of crucial cancer causing genes of breast cancer in Saudi patients
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women worldwide, causing 15% of cancer-related deaths among women. Breast cancer incidence rate is increasing in most countries. In Saudi Arabia, breast cancer constitutes nearly 22% of the newly diagnosed cancer cases in women. Breast cancer incidence in the women population of Saudi Arabia is 25.9%, with 18.2% mortality. In this study, targeted sequencing of 164 selected genes was performed on germline and somatic DNA derived from the blood and tissue samples of 50 breast cancer patients using customized panel on Ion torrent platform. This study focused on the identification of genetic variations of different cancer-causing genes, raising the hope for identification of personalized prognosis. After final filtration and validation, we found protein-truncating, non-synonymous missense, and splice site mutations in the known susceptibility genes for breast cancer. We identified a total of 14 point mutations and one deletion in BRCA1, BRCA2, and RAD50 genes from the BRCA panel analysis of breast cancer samples. In the customized panel analysis, we identified 37 potential mutations in 25 breast cancer risk associated genes. Out of these, most mutations were observed in TP53. After filtration, we observed 7 mutations in TP53 genes (n = 7:- one stop gain (p.R81X), four non-synonymous (p.R81X, p.Y88C, p.R141H, and p.V25D), and two deletions (c.59delC and c.327delC)). Among the mutations detected in our study, TP53 (p.R81X), VHL (p.E52X), and BRCA2 (p.K3326X) mutations, which lead to an aberrant transcript with a premature stop codon, were reported for the first time in breast cancer patients from Saudi Arabia. Our study will help in identifying the damaging mutations and predisposing genes in Saudi breast cancer patients.

29356034
Rare germline mutations in African American men diagnosed with early-onset prostate cancer
Background:
        
      
      African Americans have both a higher incidence of prostate cancer and greater disease-specific mortality compared with non-Hispanic whites. Historically, the investigation of the contribution of rare genetic variants to prostate cancer in African American men has been hampered by low participation in large genetic studies, particularly those focused on early-onset and familial disease.

32558426
Variant ataxia-telangiectasia in a child presenting with laryngeal dystonia
Background:
        
      
      Dystonia is a common hyperkinetic movement disorder in children; however, making an early and definitive diagnosis of dystonia can sometimes be challenging for clinicians.

30927251
Recurrent moderate-risk mutations in Finnish breast and ovarian cancer patients
Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes predispose to breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC) with a high lifetime risk, whereas mutations in PALB2, CHEK2, ATM, FANCM, RAD51C and RAD51D genes cause a moderately elevated risk. In the Finnish population, recurrent mutations have been identified in all of these genes, the latest being CHEK2 c.319+2T>A and c.444+1G>A. By genotyping 3,156 cases and 2,089 controls, we estimated the frequencies of CHEK2 c.319+2T>A and c.444+1G>A in Finnish BC patients. CHEK2 c.319+2T>A was detected in 0.7% of the patients, and it was associated with a high risk of BC in the unselected patient group (OR = 5.40 [95% CI 1.58-18.45], p = 0.007) and similarly in the familial patient group. CHEK2 c.444+1G>A was identified in 0.1% of all patients. Additionally, we evaluated the combined prevalence of recurrent moderate-risk gene mutations in 2,487 BC patients, 556 OC patients and 261 BRCA1/2 carriers from 109 families. The overall frequency of the mutations was 13.3% in 1,141 BRCA1/2-negative familial BC patients, 7.5% in 1,727 unselected BC patients and 7.2% in 556 unselected OC patients. At least one moderate-risk gene mutation was found in 12.5% of BRCA1 families and 7.1% of BRCA1 index patients, as well as in 17.0% of BRCA2 families and 11.3% of BRCA2 index patients, and the mutations were associated with an additional risk in the BRCA1/2 index patients (OR = 2.63 [1.15-5.48], p = 0.011). These results support gene panel testing of even multiple members of BC families where several mutations may segregate in different individuals.

31731261
Whole genome sequencing for the genetic diagnosis of heterogenous dystonia phenotypes
Introduction:
        
      
      Dystonia is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder and a genetic cause is often difficult to elucidate. This is the first study to use whole genome sequencing (WGS) to investigate dystonia in a large sample of affected individuals.

11805335
Missense mutations but not allelic variants alter the function of ATM by dominant interference in patients with breast cancer
The human genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is characterized by hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation and an elevated risk of malignancy. Epidemiological data support an increased risk for breast and other cancers in A-T heterozygotes. However, screening breast cancer cases for truncating mutations in the ATM (A-T mutated) gene has failed largely to reveal an increased incidence in these patients. It has been hypothesized that ATM missense mutations are implicated in breast cancer, and there is some evidence to support this. The presence of a large variety of rare missense variants in addition to common polymorphisms in ATM makes it difficult to establish such a relationship by association studies. To investigate the functional significance of these changes we have introduced missense substitutions, identified in either A-T or breast cancer patients, into ATM cDNA before establishing stable cell lines to determine their effect on ATM function. Pathogenic missense mutations and neutral missense variants were distinguished initially by their capacity to correct the radiosensitive phenotype in A-T cells. Furthermore missense mutations abolished the radiation-induced kinase activity of ATM in normal control cells, caused chromosome instability, and reduced cell viability in irradiated control cells, whereas neutral variants failed to do so. Mutant ATM was expressed at the same level as endogenous protein, and interference with normal ATM function seemed to be by multimerization. This approach represents a means of identifying genuine ATM mutations and addressing the significance of missense changes in the ATM gene in a variety of cancers including breast cancer.

20945614
Ataxia-telangiectasia in a patient presenting with hyper-immunoglobulin M syndrome
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) and hyper-immunoglobulin M (HIGM) syndrome are both primary immunodeficiency diseases caused by different genetic defects. While a small proportion of AT patients have increased serum immunoglobulin (Ig) M concentrations during the course of a disease, a high level of IgM at onset is rare. We report the case of an 8-year-old girl who had experienced recurrent respiratory infection, cutaneous abscesses, and hepatosplenomegaly since the age of 2 years. She was diagnosed with HIGM based on the results of immunological studies, including low IgG and IgA levels and raised serum IgM concentrations. However, at the age of 4 years, a neurological examination revealed gait disturbance and telangiectatic lesions on the conjunctiva; therefore, a diagnosis of AT was suggested. In spite of regular intravenous immunoglobulin infusions and antimicrobial prophylaxis, the patient experienced several episodes of respiratory infection and eventually died of respiratory failure at the age of 8 years. Further molecular analysis revealed a novel homozygous missense mutation in exon 53 (c.8250C>T, p.2622Ala>Val) of the ATM gene. Patients with AT and the HIGM phenotype may not develop clinical characteristics of AT for some time. While patients with AT and increased serum IgM levels could have a considerably more severe disease course and a shorter survival, IgM levels could be considered a prognostic factor.

9450874
Ataxia-telangiectasia without immunodeficiency: novel point mutations within and adjacent to the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like domain
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive ataxia, telangiectasia, sinopulmonary infections, hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation, and combined immunodeficiency. Recently, the AT gene (ATM) was cloned and shown to be mutated in AT patients. In this report, mutation analysis of ATM was performed in a 24-year-old AT patient without immunodeficiency. ATM amplified with reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was screened with a ribonuclease (RNase) cleavage assay and auto-sequenced. This patient, a compound heterozygote, showed two mutations in ATM: one missense mutation leading to a Leu2656Pro substitution and the other to the truncation at codon 3047 (Arg-->ter). The latter mutation is within the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)-like domain and the former is outside but close to the domain. The particular phenotype in our patient, no immunodeficiency, suggests incomplete functional loss of ATM protein. The clinical spectrum of AT caused by ATM mutations may be broader than previously thought. Further analysis of patients with similar phenotypes will make the relation between ATM genotype and phenotype clear.

23142947
Novel mutation in the ATM gene in a Malian family with ataxia telangiectasia


11826028
A late onset variant of ataxia-telangiectasia with a compound heterozygous genotype, A8030G/7481insA


26439923
Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing Revealed Novel Mutations in Chinese Ataxia Telangiectasia Patients: A Precision Medicine Perspective
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia and immunodeficiency due to mutations in the ATM gene. We performed targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) on three unrelated patients and identified five disease-causing variants in three probands, including two pairs of heterozygous variants (FAT-1:c.4396C>T/p.R1466X, c.1608-2A>G; FAT-2:c.4412_4413insT/p.L1472Ffs*19, c.8824C>T/p.Q2942X) and one pair of homozygous variants (FAT-3: c.8110T>G/p.C2704G, Hom). With regard to precision medicine for rare genetic diseases, targeted NGS currently enables the rapid and cost-effective identification of causative mutations and is an updated molecular diagnostic tool that merits further optimization. This high-throughput data-based strategy would propel the development of precision diagnostic methods and establish a foundation for precision medicine.

28486781
Genomic analysis of inherited breast cancer among Palestinian women: Genetic heterogeneity and a founder mutation in TP53
Breast cancer among Palestinian women has lower incidence than in Europe or North America, yet is very frequently familial. We studied genetic causes of this familial clustering in a consecutive hospital-based series of 875 Palestinian patients with invasive breast cancer, including 453 women with diagnosis by age 40, or with breast or ovarian cancer in a mother, sister, grandmother or aunt ("discovery series"); and 422 women diagnosed after age 40 and with negative family history ("older-onset sporadic patient series"). Genomic DNA from women in the discovery series was sequenced for all known breast cancer genes, revealing a pathogenic mutation in 13% (61/453) of patients. These mutations were screened in all patients and in 300 Palestinian female controls, revealing 1.0% (4/422) carriers among older, nonfamilial patients and two carriers among controls. The mutational spectrum was highly heterogeneous, including pathogenic mutations in 11 different genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, ATM, CHEK2, BARD1, BRIP1, PALB2, MRE11A, PTEN and XRCC2. BRCA1 carriers were significantly more likely than other patients to have triple negative tumors (p = 0.03). The single most frequent mutation was TP53 p.R181C, which was significantly enriched in the discovery series compared to controls (p = 0.01) and was responsible for 15% of breast cancers among young onset or familial patients. TP53 p.R181C predisposed specifically to breast cancer with incomplete penetrance, and not to other Li-Fraumeni cancers. Palestinian women with young onset or familial breast cancer and their families would benefit from genetic analysis and counseling.

32318955
Evaluation of pathogenetic mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes in population-based studies conducted among Chinese women
Purpose:
        
      
      Limited studies have been conducted to evaluate pathogenetic mutations in breast cancer predisposition genes among Chinese women. To fully characterize germline mutations of these genes in this population, we used the whole-exome sequencing data in a population-based case-control study conducted in Shanghai, China.

27871447
Novel compound heterozygous mutations in a child with Ataxia-Telangiectasia showing unrelated cerebellar disorders
We report the case of a 6-year-old female patient with Ataxia Telangiectasia, an extremely rare condition, who developed in addition a left cerebellar astrocytoma and a right cerebellar infarction, considered as two independent events. Children with AT have an increased risk of developing cancer, but only few cases of glioma are reported and, at our knowledge, no other case of unrelated cerebellar glioma and cerebellar infarction in with the same AT patient have been described. The molecular analysis of ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated) gene showed that the patient is compound heterozygote for two previously unreported mutations: c.3291delC (p.Phe1097fs) at exon 25 and c.8198A>C (p.Gln2733Pro) at exon 58. The role of the identified ATM gene mutations in the pathogenesis of Ataxia Telangiectasia and the coexisting cerebellar disorders is discussed.

31745173
A comprehensive evaluation of pathogenic mutations in primary cutaneous melanomas, including the identification of novel loss-of-function variants
The most common histological subtypes of cutaneous melanoma include superficial spreading and nodular melanoma. However, the spectrum of somatic mutations developed in those lesions and all potential druggable targets have not yet been fully elucidated. We present the results of a sequence capture NGS analysis of 114 primary nodular and superficial spreading melanomas identifying driver mutations using biostatistical, immunohistochemical and/or functional approach. The spectrum and frequency of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were identified across 54 evaluated genes, including 59 novel mutations, and the newly identified TP53 loss-of-function mutations p.(L194P) and p.(R280K). Frequently mutated genes most commonly affected the MAPK pathway, followed by chromatin remodeling, and cell cycle regulation. Frequent aberrations were also detected in the genes coding for proteins involved in DNA repair and the regulation and modification of cellular tight junctions. Furthermore, relatively frequent mutations were described in KDR and MET, which represent potential clinically important targets. Those results suggest that with the development of new therapeutic possibilities, not only BRAF testing, but complex molecular testing of cutaneous melanoma may become an integral part of the decision process concerning the treatment of patients with melanoma.

30851086
The genomic mutation spectrums of breast fibroadenomas in Chinese population by whole exome sequencing analysis
Fibroadenomas (FAs) are the most common fibroepithelial lesions and the most common benign tumors of the breast in women of reproductive age. Although MED12 mutations, an overwhelming majority of all mutations, and some other gene mutations have been found in FAs, the genomic landscapes of FAs are still not completely clear and the genomic mutation spectrums of FAs in Chinese population remains unknown. Here, by performing whole exome sequencing of 12 FAs and the corresponding normal breast tissues in Chinese Han population, we observed the somatic and germline landscapes of genetic alterations. We identified 16 recurrently mutated genes with 37 nonsynonymous or frameshift somatic mutations and 27 recurrent somatic copy number variants (CNVs). In these mutated genes, MED12 was the most common in FAs, harboring 6 nonsynonymous/frameshift somatic mutations and 1 CNV. In addition, 6 germline mutations of tumor susceptibility genes in 5 FAs were identified and the tumor mutational burden of the 5 FAs was significantly higher than the other 7 FAs without germline mutations. This study provides genomic mutation spectrums of FAs in Chinese population and expand the genetic spectrum of FAs.

25428789
Inherited predisposition to breast cancer among African American women
African Americans have a disproportionate burden of aggressive young-onset breast cancer. Genomic testing for inherited predisposition to breast cancer is increasingly common in clinical practice, but comprehensive mutation profiles remain unknown for most minority populations. We evaluated 289 patients who self-identified as African American with primary invasive breast cancer and with personal or family cancer history or tumor characteristics associated with high genetic risk for all classes of germline mutations in known breast cancer susceptibility genes using a validated targeted capture and multiplex sequencing approach. Sixty-eight damaging germline mutations were identified in 65 (22 %, 95 % CI 18-28 %) of the 289 subjects. Proportions of patients with unequivocally damaging mutations in a breast cancer gene were 26 % (47/180; 95 % confident interval [CI] 20-33 %) of those with breast cancer diagnosis before age 45; 25 % (26/103; 95 % CI 17-35 %) of those with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC); 29 % (45/156; 95 % CI 22-37 %) of those with a first or second degree relative with breast cancer before age 60 or with ovarian cancer; and 57 % (4/7; 95 % CI 18-90 %) of those with both breast and ovarian cancer. Of patients with mutations, 80 % (52/65) carried mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and 20 % (13/65) carried mutations in PALB2, CHEK2, BARD1, ATM, PTEN, or TP53. The mutational allelic spectrum was highly heterogeneous, with 57 different mutations in 65 patients. Of patients meeting selection criteria other than family history (i.e., with young age at diagnosis or TNBC), 48 % (64/133) had very limited information about the history of cancer in previous generations of their families. Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 or another breast cancer gene occur in one in four African American breast cancer patients with early onset disease, family history of breast or ovarian cancer, or TNBC. Each of these criteria defines patients who would benefit from genomic testing and novel therapies targeting DNA repair pathways.

21933854
ATM germline heterozygosity does not play a role in chronic lymphocytic leukemia initiation but influences rapid disease progression through loss of the remaining ATM allele
Ataxia telangiectasia patients, with constitutional bi-allelic ATM mutations, have a marked risk of lymphoid tumors and ATM mutation carriers have a smaller risk of cancer. Sporadic ATM mutations occur in 10-20% of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and are often associated with chromosome 11q deletions which cause loss of an ATM allele. The role of constitutional ATM mutations in the pathogenesis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia is unknown. Here we investigated the frequency of constitutional ATM mutations in either of two chronic lymphocytic leukemia cohorts, those with and without a chromosome 11q deletion. We found that in comparison to controls, constitutional pathogenic ATM mutations were increased in patients with chromosome 11q deletions (6 of 140 vs. 0 of 281, P = 0.001) but not in those without 11q deletions (2 of 178 vs. 0 of 281, P = 0.15). These results suggest that ATM germline heterozygosity does not play a role in chronic lymphocytic leukemia initiation but rather influences rapid disease progression through ATM loss.

26628246
Novel ATM mutations with ataxia-telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia with onset in childhood, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, increased serum alpha-fetoprotein, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, and radiation hypersensitivity. Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) is one of the known genes to be associated with ataxia telangiectasia. We reported the clinical and genetic findings of three early-onset Chinese patients who demonstrated ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, myoclonus and telangiectasia of eyes. Sequence analysis of ATM revealed two known nonsense mutations c.8287C>T and c.9139C>T in the siblings. Though the siblings carried the same mutations, they showed different clinical features involving strephenopodia, exotropia, torsion dystonia, myoclonus and extrapyramidal impairments. The other patient was compound heterozygotes for ATM: c.8911C>T and c.7141_7151delAATGGAAAAAT, both of which were not reported previously and not found in 200 control chromosomes. This study widens the spectrum of mutations and phenotypes in ataxia telangiectasia.

10534763
Identification of germline missense mutations and rare allelic variants in the ATM gene in early-onset breast cancer
Epidemiological studies have shown an increased risk of breast cancer in obligate ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) heterozygotes. We analyzed 100 samples from young breast cancer patients for mutations in ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), the gene responsible for the autosomal recessive condition, A-T, to determine whether A-T heterozygosity predisposes such individuals to develop breast cancer. These patients were selected from families with a moderate or absent family history of breast cancer and included a subset of 16 radiosensitive patients. Forty-four germline sequence variants were detected by fluorescent chemical cleavage of mismatch of RT-PCR products. These included seven rare variants found in nine patients (three described for the first time), but no truncating mutations. Although three variants were detected in the radiosensitive subset, this was not statistically significant compared to the nonradiosensitive group. One variant, G2765S, is likely to be a missense mutation, but the other six variants probably represent rare polymorphisms. However, five of the seven rare germline variants detected showed loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type ATM allele for one or more markers close to the ATM locus in matched tumor DNA. This high rate of somatic inactivation of ATM may indicate either that these rare variants play a role in breast cancer development or alternatively that a neighboring tumor suppressor gene is important for tumorigenesis. We found germline truncating ATM mutations to be rare in these young breast cancer patients and therefore they are unlikely to play a role in the etiology of their disease. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 26:286-294, 1999.

31214250
Revisiting Non-BRCA1/2 Familial Whole Exome Sequencing Datasets Implicates NCK1 as a Cancer Gene
Through linkage and candidate gene screening, many breast cancer (BC) predisposition genes have been identified in the past 20 years. However, the majority of genetic risks that contribute to familial BC remains undetermined. In this study, we revisited whole exome sequencing datasets from non-BRCA1/2 familial BC patients, to search for novel BC predisposition genes. Based on the infinite mutation model, we supposed that rare non-silent variants that cooccurred between familial and TCGA-germline datasets, might play a predisposition contributing role. In our analysis, we not only identified novel potential pathogenic variants from known cancer predisposition genes, such as MRE11, CTR9 but also identified novel candidate predisposition genes, such as NCK1. According to the TCGA mRNA expression dataset of BC, NCK1 was significantly upregulated in basal-like subtypes and downregulated in luminal subtypes. In vitro, NCK1 mutants (D73H and R42Q) transfected MCF7 cell lines, which attributed to the luminal subtype, were much more viable and invasive than the wild type. On the other side, our results also showed that overall survival and disease-free survival of patients with NCK1 variations might be dependent on the genomic context. In conclusion, genetic heterogeneity exists among non-BRCA1/2 BC pedigrees and NCK1 could be a novel BC predisposition gene.

26824983
Multiple gene sequencing for risk assessment in patients with early-onset or familial breast cancer
Since BRCA mutations are only responsible for 10-20% of cases of breast cancer in patients with early-onset or a family history and since next-generation sequencing technology allows the simultaneous sequencing of a large number of target genes, testing for multiple cancer-predisposing genes is now being considered, but its significance in clinical practice remains unclear. We then developed a sequencing panel containing 68 genes that had cancer risk association for patients with early-onset or familial breast cancer. A total of 133 patients were enrolled and 30 (22.6%) were found to carry germline deleterious mutations, 9 in BRCA1, 11 in BRCA2, 2 in RAD50, 2 in TP53 and one each in ATM, BRIP1, FANCI, MSH2, MUTYH, and RAD51C. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) was associated with the highest mutation rate (45.5%, p = 0.025). Seven of the 9 BRCA1 mutations and the single FANCI mutation were in the TNBC group; 9 of the 11 BRCA2, 1 of the 2 RAD50 as well as BRIP1, MSH2, MUTYH, and RAD51C mutations were in the hormone receptor (HR)(+)Her2(-) group, and the other RAD50, ATM, and TP53 mutations were in the HR(+)Her2(+) group. Mutation carriers were considered as high-risk to develop malignancy and advised to receive cancer screening. Screening protocols of non-BRCA genes were based on their biologic functions; for example, patients carrying RAD51C mutation received a screening protocol similar to that for BRCA, since BRCA and RAD51C are both involved in homologous recombination. In conclusion, we consider that multiple gene sequencing in cancer risk assessment is clinically valuable.

33481921
Novel genetic variants of inborn errors of immunity
Objectives:
        
      
      Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) are prevalent in tribal cultures due to frequent consanguineous marriages. Many of these disorders are autosomal recessive, resulting from founder mutations; hence they are amenable to prevention. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the pathogenicity of novel variants of IEI found among Emiratis.

9150358
Cellular localisation of the ataxia-telangiectasia (ATM) gene product and discrimination between mutated and normal forms
The recently cloned gene (ATM) mutated in the human genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is involved in DNA damage response at different cell cycle checkpoints and also appears to have a wider role in signal transduction. Antibodies prepared against peptides from the predicted protein sequence detected a approximately 350 kDa protein corresponding to the open reading frame, which was absent in 13/23 A-T homozygotes. Subcellular fractionation, immunoelectronmicroscopy and immunofluorescence showed that the ATM protein is present in the nucleus and cytoplasmic vesicles. This distribution did not change after irradiation. We also provide evidence that ATM protein binds to p53 and this association is defective in A-T cells compatible with the defective p53 response in these cells. These results provide further support for a role for the ATM protein as a sensor of DNA damage and in a more general role in cell signalling, compatible with the broader phenotype of the syndrome.

9054948
Heterozygous ATM mutations do not contribute to early onset of breast cancer
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a recessive syndrome, including cerebellar degeneration, immunologic defects and cancer predisposition, attributed to mutations in the recently isolated ATM (ataxia telangiectasia, mutated) gene. AT is diagnosed in 1/40,000 to 1/100,000 live births, with carriers calculated to comprise approximately 1% of the population. Studies of AT families have suggested that female relatives presumed to be carriers have a 5 to 8-fold increased risk for developing breast cancer, raising the possibility that germline ATM mutations may account for approximately 5% of all breast cancer cases. The increased risk for breast cancer reported for AT family members has been most evident among younger women, leading to an age-specific relative risk model predicting that 8% of breast cancer in women under age 40 arises in AT carriers, compared with 2% of cases between 40-59 years. To test this hypothesis, we undertook a germ-line mutational analysis of the ATM gene in a population of women with early onset of breast cancer, using a protein truncation (PTT) assay to detect chain-terminating mutations, which account for 90% of mutations identified in children with AT. We detected a heterozygous ATM mutation in 2/202 (1%) controls, consistent with the frequency of AT carriers predicted from epidemiologic studies. ATM mutations were present in only 2/401 (0.5%) women with early onset of breast cancer (P = 0.6). We conclude that heterozygous ATM mutations do not confer genetic predisposition to early onset of breast cancer.

23667852
Identification of ATM mutations in Korean siblings with ataxia-telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder. It is characterized by early-onset, progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, conjunctival telangiectasias, immunodeficiency, and an increased risk of malignancy. Although A-T is known to be the most common cause of progressive cerebellar ataxia in childhood, there have been no confirmed cases in Korea. We report the clinical and genetic findings of Korean siblings who presented with limb and truncal ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, and telangiectasias of the eyes. Sequence analysis of the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene revealed a known missense mutation (c.8546G>C; p.Arg2849Pro) and a novel intronic variant of intron 17 (c.2639-19_2639-7del13). Reverse-transcription PCR and sequencing analysis revealed that the c.2639-19_2639-7del13 variant causes a splicing aberration that potentiates skipping exon 18. Because A-T is quite rare in Korea, the diagnosis of A-T in Korean patients can be delayed. We recommend that a diagnosis of A-T should be suspected in Korean patients exhibiting the clinical features of A-T.

30267214
Rare loss of function variants in candidate genes and risk of colorectal cancer
Although ~ 25% of colorectal cancer or polyp (CRC/P) cases show familial aggregation, current germline genetic testing identifies a causal genotype in the 16 major genes associated with high penetrance CRC/P in only 20% of these cases. As there are likely other genes underlying heritable CRC/P, we evaluated the association of variation at novel loci with CRC/P. We evaluated 158 a priori selected candidate genes by comparing the number of rare potentially disruptive variants (PDVs) found in 84 CRC/P cases without an identified CRC/P risk-associated variant and 2440 controls. We repeated this analysis using an additional 73 CRC/P cases. We also compared the frequency of PDVs in select genes among CRC/P cases with two publicly available data sets. We found a significant enrichment of PDVs in cases vs. controls: 20% of cases vs. 11.5% of controls with ≥ 1 PDV (OR = 1.9, p = 0.01) in the original set of cases. Among the second cohort of CRC/P cases, 18% had a PDV, significantly different from 11.5% (p = 0.02). Logistic regression, adjusting for ancestry and multiple testing, indicated association between CRC/P and PDVs in NTHL1 (p = 0.0001), BRCA2 (p = 0.01) and BRIP1 (p = 0.04). However, there was no significant difference in the frequency of PDVs at each of these genes between all 157 CRC/P cases and two publicly available data sets. These results suggest an increased presence of PDVs in CRC/P cases and support further investigation of the association of NTHL1, BRCA2 and BRIP1 variation with CRC/P.

27732944
Germline mutations in Japanese familial pancreatic cancer patients
Clinicopathologic and genetic features of familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) in Asian countries remain largely unknown. The main purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence of FPC and to define causative FPC-predisposition genes in a Japanese cohort with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).We reviewed 1,197 patients with a pathologically proven PDAC and found that 88 (7.3%) were FPC patients who had at least one first-degree relative with PDAC. There were no significant differences between the FPC cases and sporadic cases in terms of gender, age, tumor location, stage, family history of any cancer except PDAC, and personal history of smoking, other cancers, diabetes mellitus and chronic pancreatitis. In the FPC patients, we then investigated the prevalence of germline mutations in 21 genes associated with hereditary predispositions for pancreatic, breast and ovarian cancers by means of the next-generation sequencing using a custom multiple-gene panel. We found that eight (14.5%) of the 54 FPC patients with available germline DNA carried deleterious mutations in BRCA2, PALB2, ATM, or MLH1. These results indicate that a significant fraction of patients with PDAC in Japan have a family history of pancreatic cancer, and some of them harbor deleterious causative mutations in known FPC predisposition genes.

8698354
New mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia gene
We report the detection of four new mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia gene (ATM). Reverse-transcribed RNA extracted from cultured cells was analysed for mutations by polymerase chain reaction amplifications and restriction endonuclease fingerprinting. Three deletions and a base substitution are described. The deletions reported here would result in severe disruptions of the ATM gene product by leading either to a protein truncation (a 4-bp deletion) or the loss of stretches of 53 and 58 amino acids (a 159-bp deletion and a 174-bp deletion, respectively); whereas the base substitution would lead to an amino acid change from a highly conserved glycine to an arginine residue.

30730459
Detection of Pathogenic Germline Variants Among Patients With Advanced Colorectal Cancer Undergoing Tumor Genomic Profiling for Precision Medicine
Background:
        
      
      Genomic profiling of colorectal cancer aims to identify actionable somatic mutations but can also discover incidental germline findings.

15843990
ATM haplotypes and associated mutations in Iranian patients with ataxia-telangiectasia: recurring homozygosity without a founder haplotype
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. The ATM gene spans more than 150 kb at chromosomal region 11q23.1 and encodes a product of 3,056 amino acids. The ATM protein is a serine/threonine protein kinase and is involved in oxidative stress, cell cycle control, and DNA repair. We analyzed the 11q22-23 haplotypes and associated mutations of 16 Iranian families. We utilized standardized short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes to enhance mutation identification. In addition to the STR markers, single-nucleotide polymorphism haplotypes were determined, using three critical polymorphisms. The entire gene was screened sequentially by protein truncation testing, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography to identify the disease-causing mutations. Of the expected 32 mutations, 25 (78%) were identified. All but two mutations led to a truncated or null form of the ATM protein (nonsense, splice site, or frameshift). Twelve mutations were identified for 15 haplotypes. Five mutations were novel. Mutations were located throughout the entire gene, with no clustering. Despite the absence of an Iranian founder mutation, three-fourths of the families were homozygous, suggesting that many undetected ATM mutations still exist in Iran. This study establishes a database for Iranian A-T families, and extends the global spectrum of ATM mutations.

32901917
Diagnostic yield and clinical utility of whole exome sequencing using an automated variant prioritization system, EVIDENCE
EVIDENCE, an automated variant prioritization system, has been developed to facilitate whole exome sequencing analyses. This study investigated the diagnostic yield of EVIDENCE in patients with suspected genetic disorders. DNA from 330 probands (age range, 0-68 years) with suspected genetic disorders were subjected to whole exome sequencing. Candidate variants were identified by EVIDENCE and confirmed by testing family members and/or clinical reassessments. EVIDENCE reported a total 228 variants in 200 (60.6%) of the 330 probands. The average number of organs involved per patient was 4.5 ± 5.0. After clinical reassessment and/or family member testing, 167 variants were identified in 141 probands (42.7%), including 105 novel variants. These variants were confirmed as being responsible for 121 genetic disorders. A total of 103 (61.7%) of the 167 variants in 95 patients were classified as pathogenic or probably to be pathogenic before, and 161 (96.4%) variants in 137 patients (41.5%) after, clinical assessment and/or family member testing. Factor associated with a variant being regarded as causative includes similar symptom scores of a gene variant to the phenotype of the patient. This new, automated variant interpretation system facilitated the diagnosis of various genetic diseases with a 42.7% diagnostic yield.

9244351
Recombinant ATM protein complements the cellular A-T phenotype
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, cancer predisposition, genome instability and radiation sensitivity. The cellular phenotype of A-T points to defects in signal transduction pathways involved in activation of cell cycle checkpoints by free radical damage, and other pathways that mediate the transmission of specific mitogenic stimuli. The product of the responsible gene, ATM, belongs to a family of large proteins that contribute to maintaining genome stability and cell cycle progression in various organisms. A recombinant vector that stably expresses a full-length ATM protein is a valuable tool for its functional analysis. We constructed and cloned a recombinant, full-length open reading frame of ATM using a combination of vectors and hosts that overcame an inherent instability of this sequence. Recombinant ATM was stably expressed in insect cells using a baculovirus vector, albeit at a low level, and in human A-T cells using an episomal expression vector. An amino-terminal FLAG epitope added to the protein allowed highly specific detection of the recombinant molecule by immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation and immunostaining, and its isolation using immunoaffinity. Similar to endogenous ATM, the recombinant protein is located mainly in the nucleus, with low levels in the cytoplasm. Ectopic expression of ATM in A-T cells restored normal sensitivity to ionizing radiation and the radiomimetic drug neocarzinostatin, and a normal pattern of post-irradiation DNA synthesis, which represents an S-phase checkpoint. These observations indicate that the recombinant, epitope-tagged protein is functional. Introduction into this molecule of a known A-T missense mutation, Glu2904Gly, resulted in apparent instability of the protein and inability to complement the A-T phenotype. These findings indicate that the physiological defects characteristic of A-T cells result from the absence of the ATM protein, and that this deficiency can be corrected by ectopic expression of this protein.

31475037
Comprehensive Genetic Analysis of a Hungarian Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Cohort
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the degeneration of motor neurons. Genetic factors play a key role in ALS, and identifying variants that contribute to ALS susceptibility is an important step toward understanding the etiology of the disease. The frequency of protein altering variants in ALS patients has been extensively investigated in populations of different ethnic origin. To further delineate the genetic architecture of the Hungarian ALS patients, we aimed to detect potentially damaging variants in major and minor ALS genes and in genes related to other neurogenetic disorders. A combination of repeat-sizing of C9orf72 and next-generation sequencing (NGS) was used to comprehensively assess genetic variations in 107 Hungarian patients with ALS. Variants in major ALS genes were detected in 36.45% of patients. As a result of repeat sizing, pathogenic repeat expansions in the C9orf72 gene were detected in 10 patients (9.3%). According to the NGS results, the most frequently mutated genes were NEK1 (5.6%), NEFH, SQSTM1 (3.7%), KIF5A, SPG11 (2.8%), ALS2, CCNF, FUS, MATR3, TBK1, and UBQLN2 (1.9%). Furthermore, potentially pathogenic variants were found in GRN and SIGMAR1 genes in single patients. Additional 33 novel or rare known variants were detected in minor ALS genes, as well as 48 variants in genes previously linked to other neurogenetic disorders. The latter finding supports the hypothesis that common pathways in different neurodegenerative diseases may contribute to the development of ALS. While the disease-causing role of several variants identified in this study has previously been established, other variants may show reduced penetrance or may be rare benign variants. Our findings highlight the necessity for large-scale multicenter studies on ALS patients to gain a more accurate view of the genetic pattern of ALS.

19147735
Rapid flow cytometry-based structural maintenance of chromosomes 1 (SMC1) phosphorylation assay for identification of ataxia-telangiectasia homozygotes and heterozygotes
Background:
        
      
      No rapid reliable method exists for identifying ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) homozygotes or heterozygotes. Heterozygotes are at an increased risk of cancer and are more sensitive to the effects of ionizing radiation (IR) than the general population. We report a rapid flow cytometry (FC)-based ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase assay that measures ATM- dependent phosphorylation of structural maintenance of chromosomes 1 (SMC1) following DNA damage (FC-pSMC1 assay).

32655291
Identification of Two Novel Mutations in the ATM Gene from Patients with Ataxia-Telangiectasia by Whole Exome Sequencing
Background:
        
      
      Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is one of the most common autosomal recessive hereditary ataxia presenting in childhood. The responsible gene for AT designated ATM (AT, mutated) encodes a protein which is involved in cell cycle checkpoints and other responses to genotoxicity. We describe two novel disease-causing mutations in two unrelated Iranian families with Ataxia-telangiectasia.

12511424
Missense mutation and defective function of ATM in a childhood acute leukemia patient with MLL gene rearrangement
The possible involvement of germline mutation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene in childhood acute leukemia with mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene rearrangement (MLL(+)) was investigated. Of the 7 patients studied, 1 showed a germline missense ATM mutation (8921C>T; Pro2974Leu), located in the phosphatidylinositol-3 (PI-3) kinase domain. In reconstitution assays, the ATM mutant 8921T could only partially rescue the radiosensitive phenotype of AT fibroblasts, and in an in vitro kinase assay, it showed a defective phosphorylation of p53-Ser15. Furthermore, the introduction of 8921T in U2OS cells, characterized by a normal ATM/p53 signal transduction, caused a significant reduction of in vivo p53-Ser15 phosphorylation, suggesting a dominant-negative effect of the mutant ATM over the wild-type protein. Our finding in this patient suggests that altered function of ATM plays some pathogenic roles in the development of MLL(+) leukemia.

31160347
Discovery of a Pathogenic Variant rs139379666 (p. P2974L) in ATM for Breast Cancer Risk in Chinese Populations
Background:
        
      
      Pathogenic variants in susceptibility genes lead to increased breast cancer risk.

30214756
Identification of a BRCA2 mutation in a Turkish family with early-onset breast cancer
We used a multi-gene panel testing to identify the germline variants in a mother-daughter pair with early-onset breast cancer, and detected one pathogenic protein-truncating variant in BRCA2. Our results highlight the importance of genetic testing in identifying the pathogenic mutation running in cancer families.

9537233
The role of ataxia-telangiectasia heterozygotes in familial breast cancer
The role of ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) heterozygotes in breast cancer has been controversial. We have found previously an overrepresentation (3.4%) of ATM mutations in a subset of 88 selected breast cancer patients with a family history of breast cancer, leukemia, and lymphoma. This prevalence is comparable to the estimated value (3.8%) from epidemiological study. To further examine the possibility that ATM is correlated to breast cancer, we screened for ATM germ-line mutations in another 100 breast cancer patients with a family history of breast cancer. We used the protein truncating test and found one new germ-line mutation. This figure (1%) is consistent with the observed 0.2-1% carrier frequency for AT. We also studied breast tumors from ATM mutants, and three showed retention of both alleles, whereas the fourth showed loss of the mutant allele. We conclude that the contribution of heterozygous ATM mutations to familial breast cancer is minimal. Even if the ATM gene were causative in these cases, it is not likely to act as a tumor suppressor.

29978187
Prevalence of Germline Mutations in Cancer Susceptibility Genes in Patients With Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma
Importance:
        
      
      Identification of patients with hereditary renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is important for cancer screening and, in patients with advanced disease, for guiding treatment. The prevalence of cancer-related germline mutations in patients with advanced RCC and the phenotypes associated with some rare mutations are unknown.

31642931
Assessment of Diagnostic Outcomes of RNA Genetic Testing for Hereditary Cancer
Importance:
        
      
      Performing DNA genetic testing (DGT) for hereditary cancer genes is now a well-accepted clinical practice; however, the interpretation of DNA variation remains a challenge for laboratories and clinicians. Adding RNA genetic testing (RGT) enhances DGT by clarifying the clinical actionability of hereditary cancer gene variants, thus improving clinicians' ability to accurately apply strategies for cancer risk reduction and treatment.

31921190
Ataxia Telangiectasia Diagnosed on Newborn Screening-Case Cohort of 5 Years' Experience
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a genetic condition caused by mutations involving ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated). This gene is responsible for the expression of a DNA double stranded break repair kinase, the ATM protein kinase. The syndrome encompasses combined immunodeficiency and various degrees of neurological abnormalities and increased risk of malignancy. Typically, patients present early in life with delay in neurological milestones, but very infrequently, with life threatening infections typical of a profound T cell deficiency. It would therefore be unexpected to identify this condition immediately after birth using T cell receptor excision circle (TREC)-based newborn screening (NBS) for SCID. We sought to evaluate the frequency of AT detected by NBS, and to assess immunity as well as the genetic aberrations associated with this early presentation. Here, we describe the clinical, laboratory, and genetic features of patients diagnosed with AT through the Ontario NBS program for SCID, and followed in our center since its inception in 2013. Four patients were diagnosed with AT as a result of low TRECs on NBS. In each case, whole exome sequencing was diagnostic. All of our patients had compound heterozygous mutations involving the FRAP-ATM-TRRAP (FAT) domain of the ATM gene, which appears critical for kinase activity and is highly sensitive to mutagenesis. Our patients presented with profound lymphopenia involving both B and T cells. The ratio of naïve/memory CD45+RA/RO T cells population was variable. T cell repertoire showed decreased T cell diversity. Two out of four patients had decreased specific antibody response to vaccination and hypogammaglobulinemia requiring IVIG replacement. In two patients, profound decreased responses to phytohemagglutinin stimulation was observed. In the other two patients, the initial robust response declined with time. In summary, the rate of detection of AT through NBS had been surprisingly high at our center. One case was identified per year, while the total rate for SCID has been five new cases per year. This early detection may allow for better prospective evaluation of AT shortly after birth, and may assist in formulating early and more effective interventions both for the neurological as well as the immune abnormalities in this syndrome.

29288088
Telangiectasias in Ataxia Telangiectasia: Clinical significance, role of ATM deficiency and potential pathophysiological mechanisms
Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) is named after the two key clinical features that characterize its classical phenotype, namely a progressive cerebellar gait disorder (ataxia) and vascular anomalies (telangiectasias) visible in the conjunctivae and skin. AT is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder, caused by mutations in the ATM gene that encodes the ATM protein. While the ataxia is subject of many publications, the telangiectasias are under emphasised. We here describe the observation that the absence or presence of ATM protein and the level of residual ATM kinase activity are related to the occurrence of telangiectasias and describe the clinical consequences of these vascular malformations. Finally, we hypothesize that ATM dysfunction dysregulates angiogenesis.

14695534
Nonclassical splicing mutations in the coding and noncoding regions of the ATM Gene: maximum entropy estimates of splice junction strengths
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurological disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Classical splicing mutations (type I) delete entire exons during pre-mRNA splicing. In this report, we describe nine examples of nonclassical splicing mutations in 12 A-T patients and compare cDNA changes to estimates of splice junction strengths based on maximum entropy modeling. These mutations fall into three categories: pseudoexon insertions (type II), single nucleotide changes within the exon (type III), and intronic changes that disrupt the conserved 3' splice sequence and lead to partial exon deletion (type IV). Four patients with a previously reported type II (pseudoexon) mutation all shared a common founder haplotype. Three patients with apparent missense or silent mutations actually had type III aberrant splicing and partial deletion of an exon. Five patients had type IV mutations that could have been misinterpreted as classical splicing mutations. Instead, their mutations disrupt a splice site and use another AG splice site located nearby within the exon; they lead to partial deletions at the beginning of exons. These nonclassical splicing mutations create frameshifts that result in premature termination codons. Without screening cDNA or using accurate models of splice site strength, the consequences of these genomic mutations cannot be reliably predicted. This may lead to further misinterpretation of genotype-phenotype correlations and may subsequently impact upon gene-based therapeutic approaches.

32259893
Late-onset autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia and neuropathy with a novel splicing mutation in the ATM gene
Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias comprise many types of diseases. The most frequent autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias are Friedreich ataxia, but other types are relatively rare. We encountered a consanguineous family with two cases of late-onset cerebellar ataxia with neuropathy. We performed whole-exome sequencing in one patient and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in other family members. Neurological examination revealed cerebellar ataxia, hand tremor, and neck dystonia, distal muscle wasting, and diminished tendon reflexes. The patients had no conjunctival telangiectasia or immunodeficiency. Blood examination revealed slightly elevated α-fetoprotein. Brain MRI demonstrated marked cerebellar atrophy and mild brainstem atrophy. The electrophysiologic study and nerve biopsy showed axonal neuropathy. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a novel homozygous missense variant (NM_000051.3: c.496G > C) in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene. This homozygous variant was found in another patient, co-segregated within the family members-this variant results in aberrant splicing (skipping exon 5) on RT-PCR analysis. We identified the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated variant in an adult, late-onset autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias family. We should consider ataxia-telangiectasia even in late-onset autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias without telangiectasia or immunodeficiency.

15054841
Slow progression of ataxia-telangiectasia with double missense and in frame splice mutations
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is caused by mutations of the ATM gene, the product of which is involved in the regulation of cellular responses to radiation damage. Ataxia usually starts in early childhood but a delayed age at onset and slower rate of neurological deterioration has been found for some patients with variant A-T. Only few patients have been documented to survive into the 4th decade. We report on a patient with an attenuated form of A-T who was diagnosed as having A-T by the age of 52 years and died by the age of 60 years. He was found to be a compound heterozygote for a double missense mutation (D2625E and A2626P) and a novel splicing mutation (496 + 5G --> A) of the ATM gene. Cytogenetic studies of the patient's lymphoblastoid cells revealed modest levels of bleomycin-induced chromosomal instability. Residual ATM protein was found at a level of 10-20% of wildtype. Low residual ATM kinase activity could be demonstrated towards p53, whereas it was poorly detectable towards nibrin. Our results corroborate the view that the clinical variability of A-T is partly determined by the mutation type and indicate that A-T can extend to late adulthood disease.

10677309
ATM-heterozygous germline mutations contribute to breast cancer-susceptibility
Approximately 0.5%-1% of the general population has been estimated to be heterozygous for a germline mutation in the ATM gene. Mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) (MIM 208900). The finding that ATM-heterozygotes have an increased relative risk for breast cancer was supported by some studies but not confirmed by others. In view of this discrepancy, we examined the frequency of ATM germline mutations in a selected group of Dutch patients with breast cancer. We have analyzed ATM germline mutations in normal blood lymphocytes, using the protein-truncation test followed by genomic-sequence analysis. A high percentage of ATM germline mutations was demonstrated among patients with sporadic breast cancer. The 82 patients included in this study had developed breast cancer at age <45 and had survived >/=5 years (mean 15 years), and in 33 (40%) of the patients a contralateral breast tumor had been diagnosed. Among these patients we identified seven (8.5%) ATM germline mutations, of which five are distinct. One splice-site mutation (IVS10-6T-->G) was detected three times in our series. Four heterozygous carriers were patients with bilateral breast cancer. Our results indicate that the mutations identified in this study are "A-T disease-causing" mutations that might be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in heterozygotes. We conclude that ATM heterozygotes have an approximately ninefold-increased risk of developing a type of breast cancer characterized by frequent bilateral occurrence, early age at onset, and long-term survival. The specific characteristics of our population of patients may explain why such a high frequency was not found in other series.

28687971
The spectrum of genetic variants in hereditary pancreatic cancer includes Fanconi anemia genes
Approximately 5-10% of all pancreatic cancer patients carry a predisposing mutation in a known susceptibility gene. Since >90% of patients present with late stage disease, it is crucial to identify high risk individuals who may be amenable to early detection or other prevention. To explore the spectrum of hereditary pancreatic cancer susceptibility, we evaluated germline DNA from pancreatic cancer participants (n = 53) from a large hereditary cancer registry. For those without a known predisposition mutation gene (n = 49), germline next generation sequencing was completed using targeted capture for 706 candidate genes. We identified 16 of 53 participants (30%) with a pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) variant that may be related to their hereditary pancreatic cancer predisposition; seven had mutations in genes associated with well-known cancer syndromes (13%) [ATM (2), BRCA2 (3), MSH2 (1), MSH6 (1)]. Many had mutations in Fanconi anemia complex genes [BRCA2 (3 participants), FANCF, FANCM]. Eight participants had rare protein truncating variants of uncertain significance with no other P or LP variants. Earlier age of pancreatic cancer diagnosis (57.5 vs 64.8 years) was indicative of possessing a P or LP variant, as was cancer family history (p values <0.0001). Our multigene panel approach for identifying known cancer predisposing genetic susceptibility in those at risk for hereditary pancreatic cancer may have direct applicability to clinical practice in cases with mutations in actionable genes. Future pancreatic cancer predisposition studies should include evaluation of the Fanconi anemia genes.

23211698
Deep-intronic ATM mutation detected by genomic resequencing and corrected in vitro by antisense morpholino oligonucleotide (AMO)
Recent development of next-generation DNA sequencing (NGS) techniques is changing the approach to search for mutations in human genetic diseases. We applied NGS to study an A-T patient in which one of the two expected mutations was not found after DHPLC, cDNA sequencing and MLPA screening. The 160-kb ATM genomic region was divided into 31 partially overlapping fragments of 4-6 kb and amplified by long-range PCR in the patient and mother, who carried the same mutation by segregation. We identified six intronic variants that were shared by the two genomes and not reported in the dbSNP(132) database. Among these, c.1236-405C>T located in IVS11 was predicted to be pathogenic because it affected splicing. This mutation creates a cryptic novel donor (5') splice site (score 1.00) 405 bp upstream of the exon 12 acceptor (3') splice site. cDNA analysis showed the inclusion of a 212-bp non-coding 'pseudoexon' with a premature stop codon. We validated the functional effect of the splicing mutation using a minigene assay. Using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides, designed to mask the cryptic donor splice-site created by the c.1236-405C>T mutation, we abrogated the aberrant splicing product to a wild-type ATM transcript, and in vitro reverted the functional ATM kinase impairment of the patients' lymphoblasts. Resequencing is an effective strategy for identifying rare splicing mutations in patients for whom other mutation analyses have failed (DHPLC, MLPA, or cDNA sequencing). This is especially important because many of these patients will carry rare splicing variants that are amenable to antisense-based correction.

24586880
Exon first nucleotide mutations in splicing: evaluation of in silico prediction tools
Mutations in the first nucleotide of exons (E(+1)) mostly affect pre-mRNA splicing when found in AG-dependent 3' splice sites, whereas AG-independent splice sites are more resistant. The AG-dependency, however, may be difficult to assess just from primary sequence data as it depends on the quality of the polypyrimidine tract. For this reason, in silico prediction tools are commonly used to score 3' splice sites. In this study, we have assessed the ability of sequence features and in silico prediction tools to discriminate between the splicing-affecting and non-affecting E(+1) variants. For this purpose, we newly tested 16 substitutions in vitro and derived other variants from literature. Surprisingly, we found that in the presence of the substituting nucleotide, the quality of the polypyrimidine tract alone was not conclusive about its splicing fate. Rather, it was the identity of the substituting nucleotide that markedly influenced it. Among the computational tools tested, the best performance was achieved using the Maximum Entropy Model and Position-Specific Scoring Matrix. As a result of this study, we have now established preliminary discriminative cut-off values showing sensitivity up to 95% and specificity up to 90%. This is expected to improve our ability to detect splicing-affecting variants in a clinical genetic setting.

31741144
Childhood-onset autosomal recessive ataxias: a cross-sectional study from Turkey
Autosomal recessive ataxias (ARAs) are a heterogeneous group of inherited neurodegenerative disorders that affect the cerebellum, the spinocerebellar tract, and/or the sensory tracts of the spinal cord. This study is aimed at establishing molecular classification and phenotypic correlation of childhood-onset ARAs in Southeast Anatolia of Turkey. Sixty-five children (aged 0 to 18) from 40 unrelated families who were analyzed through hereditary ataxia NGS panel between the years of 2015-2018 were selected for the study. Seventeen different, clinically significant ARA-related pathogenic variants were detected in 33 of 40 families (82.5%), 12 of which were noted to be unreported variants. Among these 33 families, 24 had ATM-related (72.72%), four had SACS-related (12.12%), three had COQ8A-related (9.09%), and two had APTX-related (6.06%) pathogenic variants. The c.3576G>A (p.K1192=) was the most common homozygous pathogenic ATM variant (33.33%) that was associated with milder phenotype of ataxia telangiectasia (AT) with the onset of age of 3. Patients with SACS variants demonstrated developmental delay and progressive ataxia before the age of 3. Slowly progressive ataxia and intellectual disability were the common clinical manifestations of the patients with homozygous c.1396delG (p. E466Rfs*11) pathogenic variant in COQ8A. Homozygous APTX c.689T>G (p.V230G) pathogenic variant was identified in two patients who had chief complaint of ataxic gait onset after puberty. The most common types of ARAs in this region are AT- and Charlevoix-Saguenay-type spastic ataxia. ATM gene analysis should be performed foremost on children presenting early-onset ataxia from Southeastern Anatolia. If there is a concomitant peripheral neuron involvement, SACS gene analysis should be preferred. This valuable data will be a guide for the first step molecular diagnostic approach before requesting the NGS panel for ARA.

11298136
Novel mutations and defective protein kinase C activation of T-lymphocytes in ataxia telangiectasia
Three ataxia telangiectasia (AT) patients have been characterized immunologically and molecularly. Patient 1 presents two nondescribed splicing mutations which affect exons 15 and 21 of the ATM gene. The maternal defect consists of a G > A transition in the first nucleotide of the intron 21 donor splicing site which results in a complete deletion of exon 21. The paternal mutation consists of an A > C transversion in the intron 14 acceptor splicing site which produces a partial skipping of exon 15. Two abnormal alternative transcripts were found, respectively, 17 and 41 nucleotides shorter. Patient 2 presents a homozygous genomic deletion of 28 nucleotides in the last exon of the gene. This deletion changes the normal reading frame after residue 3003 of the protein and introduces a premature stop codon at residue 3008 that could originate a truncated ATM protein. Patient 3, a compound heterozygote, presents a defect which consists of a G > A transition in the first nucleotide of intron 62 donor splicing site which results in a complete deletion of exon 62. The results obtained during a three year period in the proliferation assays show an impaired PMA (phorbol myristate acetate) activation in specific T lymphocyte activation pathways (CD69, CD26, CD28, CD3, PHA, PWM and Con A mediated) but not in others (CD2, ionomycin, and Ig surface receptor). The possible link among specific ATM mutations and abnormal immune responses is unknown.

32005694
Clinical exome sequencing as the first-tier test for diagnosing developmental disorders covering both CNV and SNV: a Chinese cohort
Background:
        
      
      Developmental disorders (DDs) are early onset disorders affecting 5%-10% of children worldwide. Chromosomal microarray analysis detecting CNVs is currently recommended as the first-tier test for DD diagnosis. However, this analysis omits a high percentage of disease-causing single nucleotide variations (SNVs) that warrant further sequencing. Currently, next-generation sequencing can be used in clinical scenarios detecting CNVs, and the use of exome sequencing in the DD cohort ahead of the microarray test has not been evaluated.

32748564
Severe reaction to radiotherapy provoked by hypomorphic germline mutations in ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene)
Background:
        
      
      A minority of breast cancer (BC) patients suffer from severe reaction to adjuvant radiotherapy (RT). Although deficient DNA double-strand break repair is considered the main basis for the reactions, pretreatment identification of high-risk patients has been challenging.

27671921
Ataxia telangiectasia associated with nodular regenerative hyperplasia


32531373
Improving the diagnostic efficiency of primary immunodeficiencies with targeted next-generation sequencing


32133419
Splicing profile by capture RNA-seq identifies pathogenic germline variants in tumor suppressor genes
Germline variants in tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) can result in RNA mis-splicing and predisposition to cancer. However, identification of variants that impact splicing remains a challenge, contributing to a substantial proportion of patients with suspected hereditary cancer syndromes remaining without a molecular diagnosis. To address this, we used capture RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) to generate a splicing profile of 18 TSGs (APC, ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDH1, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, MUTYH, NF1, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN, RAD51C, RAD51D, and TP53) in 345 whole-blood samples from healthy donors. We subsequently demonstrated that this approach can detect mis-splicing by comparing splicing profiles from the control dataset to profiles generated from whole blood of individuals previously identified with pathogenic germline splicing variants in these genes. To assess the utility of our TSG splicing profile to prospectively identify pathogenic splicing variants, we performed concurrent capture DNA and RNA-seq in a cohort of 1000 patients with suspected hereditary cancer syndromes. This approach improved the diagnostic yield in this cohort, resulting in a 9.1% relative increase in the detection of pathogenic variants, demonstrating the utility of performing simultaneous DNA and RNA genetic testing in a clinical context.

24422204
Ataxia-telangiectasia with novel splicing mutations in the ATM gene


31130284
Lessons Learned from Large-Scale, First-Tier Clinical Exome Sequencing in a Highly Consanguineous Population
We report the results of clinical exome sequencing (CES) on >2,200 previously unpublished Saudi families as a first-tier test. The predominance of autosomal-recessive causes allowed us to make several key observations. We highlight 155 genes that we propose to be recessive, disease-related candidates. We report additional mutational events in 64 previously reported candidates (40 recessive), and these events support their candidacy. We report recessive forms of genes that were previously associated only with dominant disorders and that have phenotypes ranging from consistent with to conspicuously distinct from the known dominant phenotypes. We also report homozygous loss-of-function events that can inform the genetics of complex diseases. We were also able to deduce the likely causal variant in most couples who presented after the loss of one or more children, but we lack samples from those children. Although a similar pattern of mostly recessive causes was observed in the prenatal setting, the higher proportion of loss-of-function events in these cases was notable. The allelic series presented by the wealth of recessive variants greatly expanded the phenotypic expression of the respective genes. We also make important observations about dominant disorders; these observations include the pattern of de novo variants, the identification of 74 candidate dominant, disease-related genes, and the potential confirmation of 21 previously reported candidates. Finally, we describe the influence of a predominantly autosomal-recessive landscape on the clinical utility of rapid sequencing (Flash Exome). Our cohort's genotypic and phenotypic data represent a unique resource that can contribute to improved variant interpretation through data sharing.

21454829
Evaluation of functional genetic variants for breast cancer risk: results from the Shanghai breast cancer study
In previous studies among 1,144 cases and 1,256 controls recruited in stage 1 of the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study (SBCS I; 1996-1998), 18 known or potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 16 genes were found to be associated with breast cancer risk. The authors evaluated these associations among 1,918 cases and 1,819 controls recruited in stage 2 of the SBCS (SBCS II; 2002-2005) using genetic effect models and subgroup analyses predetermined from SBCS I results. Five SNPs (AHR rs2066853, ATM rs1003623, ESR1 rs2234693, GSTP1 rs1695, and SHBG rs6259) showed generally consistent results in SBCS I and SBCS II and statistically significant associations with breast cancer risk in combined analyses, mostly in subgroups defined by age or menopausal status. Further, the relation between breast cancer risk and SHBG rs6259 was found to vary by body mass index (weight (kg)/height (m)(2)) (P for interaction = 0.003). The strongest reduction in risk associated with SHBG rs6259 was found for lean (body mass index <23) postmenopausal minor allele carriers (odds ratio = 0.6, 95% confidence interval: 0.5, 0.8; P = 4.6 × 10(-4)). This biologically plausible and highly significant finding provides strong evidence for a true association among Asian women. This study also highlights the value of gene-environment interaction analyses in evaluating genetic factors for complex diseases.

31811167
Results of multigene panel testing in familial cancer cases without genetic cause demonstrated by single gene testing
We have surveyed 191 prospectively sampled familial cancer patients with no previously detected pathogenic variant in the BRCA1/2, PTEN, TP53 or DNA mismatch repair genes. In all, 138 breast cancer (BC) cases, 34 colorectal cancer (CRC) and 19 multiple early-onset cancers were included. A panel of 44 cancer-predisposing genes identified 5% (9/191) pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants and 87 variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were identified mostly in familial BC individuals (7/9) and were located in 5 genes: ATM (3), BRCA2 (1), CHEK2 (1), MSH6 (1) and MUTYH (1), followed by multiple early-onset (2/9) individuals, affecting the CHEK2 and ATM genes. Eleven of the 87 VUS were tested, and 4/11 were found to have an impact on splicing by using a minigene splicing assay. We here report for the first time the splicing anomalies using this assay for the variants ATM c.3806A > G and BUB1 c.677C > T, whereas CHEK1 c.61G > A did not result in any detectable splicing anomaly. Our study confirms the presence of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in genes that are not routinely tested in the context of the above-mentioned clinical phenotypes. Interestingly, more than half of the pathogenic germline variants were found in the moderately penetrant ATM and CHEK2 genes, where only truncating variants from these genes are recommended to be reported in clinical genetic testing practice.

26732650
Exon-centric regulation of ATM expression is population-dependent and amenable to antisense modification by pseudoexon targeting
ATM is an important cancer susceptibility gene that encodes a critical apical kinase of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway. We show that a key nonsense-mediated RNA decay switch exon (NSE) in ATM is repressed by U2AF, PUF60 and hnRNPA1. The NSE activation was haplotype-specific and was most promoted by cytosine at rs609621 in the NSE 3' splice-site (3'ss), which is predominant in high cancer risk populations. NSE levels were deregulated in leukemias and were influenced by the identity of U2AF35 residue 34. We also identify splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSOs) that exploit competition of adjacent pseudoexons to modulate NSE levels. The U2AF-regulated exon usage in the ATM signalling pathway was centred on the MRN/ATM-CHEK2-CDC25-cdc2/cyclin-B axis and preferentially involved transcripts implicated in cancer-associated gene fusions and chromosomal translocations. These results reveal important links between 3'ss control and ATM-dependent responses to double-strand DNA breaks, demonstrate functional plasticity of intronic variants and illustrate versatility of intronic SSOs that target pseudo-3'ss to modify gene expression.

15643608
Functional significance of a deep intronic mutation in the ATM gene and evidence for an alternative exon 28a
Screening for ATM mutations is usually performed using genomic DNA as a template for PCR amplification across exonic regions, with the consequence that deep intronic sequences are not analyzed. Here we report a novel pseudoexon-retaining deep intronic mutation (IVS28-159A>G; g.75117A>G based on GenBank U82828.1) in a patient with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), as well as the identification of a previously unrecognized alternative exon in the ATM gene (exon 28a) expressed in lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) derived from normal individuals. cDNA analysis using the A-T patient's LCL showed the retention of two aberrant intronic segments of 112 and 190 nt between exons 28 and 29. Minigenes were constructed to determine the functional significance of two genomic changes in the region of aberrant splicing: IVS28-193C>T (g.75083C>T) and IVS28-159A>G, revealing that: 1) the first is a polymorphism; 2) IVS28-159A>G weakens the 5' splice site of the alternative exon 28a and activates a cryptic 5' splice site (ss) 83 nt downstream; and 3) wild-type constructs also retain a 29-nt segment (exon 28a) as part of both the 112- and 190-nt segments. Maximum entropy estimates of ss strengths corroborate the cDNA and minigene findings. Such mutations may prove relevant in planning therapy that targets specific splicing aberrations.

19823873
Transposable elements in disease-associated cryptic exons
Transposable elements (TEs) make up a half of the human genome, but the extent of their contribution to cryptic exon activation that results in genetic disease is unknown. Here, a comprehensive survey of 78 mutation-induced cryptic exons previously identified in 51 disease genes revealed the presence of TEs in 40 cases (51%). Most TE-containing exons were derived from short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), with Alus and mammalian interspersed repeats (MIRs) covering >18 and >16% of the exonized sequences, respectively. The majority of SINE-derived cryptic exons had splice sites at the same positions of the Alu/MIR consensus as existing SINE exons and their inclusion in the mRNA was facilitated by phylogenetically conserved changes that improved both traditional and auxiliary splicing signals, thus marking intronic TEs amenable for pathogenic exonization. The overrepresentation of MIRs among TE exons is likely to result from their high average exon inclusion levels, which reflect their strong splice sites, a lack of splicing silencers and a high density of enhancers, particularly (G)AA(G) motifs. These elements were markedly depleted in antisense Alu exons, had the most prominent position on the exon-intron gradient scale and are proposed to promote exon definition through enhanced tertiary RNA interactions involving unpaired (di)adenosines. The identification of common mechanisms by which the most dynamic parts of the genome contribute both to new exon creation and genetic disease will facilitate detection of intronic mutations and the development of computational tools that predict TE hot-spots of cryptic exon activation.

34009545
Decreased ATM Function Causes Delayed DNA Repair and Apoptosis in Common Variable Immunodeficiency Disorders
Purpose:
        
      
      Common variable immunodeficiency disorders (CVID) is characterized by low/absent serum immunoglobulins and susceptibility to bacterial infection. Patients can develop an infections-only phenotype or a complex disease course with inflammatory, autoimmune, and/or malignant complications. We hypothesized that deficient DNA repair mechanisms may be responsible for the antibody deficiency and susceptibility to inflammation and cancer in some patients.

32566746
Prevalence of disease-causing genes in Japanese patients with BRCA1/2-wildtype hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome
Panel sequencing of susceptibility genes for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome has uncovered numerous germline variants; however, their pathogenic relevance and ethnic diversity remain unclear. Here, we examined the prevalence of germline variants among 568 Japanese patients with BRCA1/2-wildtype HBOC syndrome and a strong family history. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were identified on 12 causal genes for 37 cases (6.5%), with recurrence for 4 SNVs/indels and 1 CNV. Comparisons with non-cancer east-Asian populations and European familial breast cancer cohorts revealed significant enrichment of PALB2, BARD1, and BLM mutations. Younger onset was associated with but not predictive of these mutations. Significant somatic loss-of-function alterations were confirmed on the wildtype alleles of genes with germline mutations, including PALB2 additional somatic truncations. This study highlights Japanese-associated germline mutations among patients with BRCA1/2 wildtype HBOC syndrome and a strong family history, and provides evidence for the medical care of this high-risk population.

9497252
Genotype-phenotype relationships in ataxia-telangiectasia and variants
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. A-T cells are sensitive to ionizing radiation and radiomimetic chemicals and fail to activate cell-cycle checkpoints after treatment with these agents. The responsible gene, ATM, encodes a large protein kinase with a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like domain. The typical A-T phenotype is caused, in most cases, by null ATM alleles that truncate or severely destabilize the ATM protein. Rare patients with milder manifestations of the clinical or cellular characteristics of the disease have been reported and have been designated "A-T variants." A special variant form of A-T is A-TFresno, which combines a typical A-T phenotype with microcephaly and mental retardation. The possible association of these syndromes with ATM is both important for understanding their molecular basis and essential for counseling and diagnostic purposes. We quantified ATM-protein levels in six A-T variants, and we searched their ATM genes for mutations. Cell lines from these patients exhibited considerable variability in radiosensitivity while showing the typical radioresistant DNA synthesis of A-T cells. Unlike classical A-T patients, these patients exhibited 1%-17% of the normal level of ATM. The underlying ATM genotypes were either homozygous for mutations expected to produce mild phenotypes or compound heterozygotes for a mild and a severe mutation. An A-TFresno cell line was found devoid of the ATM protein and homozygous for a severe ATM mutation. We conclude that certain "A-T variant" phenotypes represent ATM mutations, including some of those without telangiectasia. Our findings extend the range of phenotypes associated with ATM mutations.

31019026
Diagnosis of genetic diseases in seriously ill children by rapid whole-genome sequencing and automated phenotyping and interpretation
By informing timely targeted treatments, rapid whole-genome sequencing can improve the outcomes of seriously ill children with genetic diseases, particularly infants in neonatal and pediatric intensive care units (ICUs). The need for highly qualified professionals to decipher results, however, precludes widespread implementation. We describe a platform for population-scale, provisional diagnosis of genetic diseases with automated phenotyping and interpretation. Genome sequencing was expedited by bead-based genome library preparation directly from blood samples and sequencing of paired 100-nt reads in 15.5 hours. Clinical natural language processing (CNLP) automatically extracted children's deep phenomes from electronic health records with 80% precision and 93% recall. In 101 children with 105 genetic diseases, a mean of 4.3 CNLP-extracted phenotypic features matched the expected phenotypic features of those diseases, compared with a match of 0.9 phenotypic features used in manual interpretation. We automated provisional diagnosis by combining the ranking of the similarity of a patient's CNLP phenome with respect to the expected phenotypic features of all genetic diseases, together with the ranking of the pathogenicity of all of the patient's genomic variants. Automated, retrospective diagnoses concurred well with expert manual interpretation (97% recall and 99% precision in 95 children with 97 genetic diseases). Prospectively, our platform correctly diagnosed three of seven seriously ill ICU infants (100% precision and recall) with a mean time saving of 22:19 hours. In each case, the diagnosis affected treatment. Genome sequencing with automated phenotyping and interpretation in a median of 20:10 hours may increase adoption in ICUs and, thereby, timely implementation of precise treatments.

18497957
Contribution of mutations in ATM to breast cancer development in the Czech population
Mutations in the ATM gene are the cause of a rare autosomal recessive syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (AT). Of the general population, approximately 0.35-1% has been estimated to be heterozygous for a germline mutation in the ATM gene. The finding that ATM heterozygotes have an increased breast cancer risk was supported by some studies but not confirmed by others. In our study, the entire coding sequence of the ATM gene was prescreened for mutations by the protein truncation test to detect the chain-terminating mutations that are highly predominant in patients with AT. DNA sequencing then characterized 3 (1.9%) pathogenic mutations among 161 high-risk breast cancer patients. The c.5177+1G>A splicing mutation was a novel gene alteration. No mutation was detected in a group of 183 control individuals. Our results suggest that truncating mutations in ATM increase breast cancer risk and contribute to inherited breast cancer. The analysis further uncovered the c.1066-6T>G splicing mutation once among high-risk patients (0.6%) and twice among controls (1.1%) suggesting that this mutation does not confer an increase in breast cancer risk. On the other hand, individuals heterozygous for this truncating variant displayed loss of exon 11 in approximately 50% of ATM transcripts. Immunohistochemistry did not detect the ATM protein in the tumor sample carrying this mutation. Thus, the association of the c.1066-6T>G mutation with familial breast cancer remains uncertain. Loss of the wild-type ATM allele has not been detected in the tumor samples from heterozygous carriers of the ATM mutation. Our experiments did not detect the hypermethylation of the ATM promoter in any of the DNA samples from tumor tissues.

23143971
Very mild presentation in adult with classical cellular phenotype of ataxia telangiectasia
Background:
        
      
      The major clinical feature of ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is severe progressive neurodegeneration with onset in infancy. This classical A-T phenotype is caused by biallelic null mutations in the ATM gene, leading to the absence of ATM protein and increased cellular radiosensitivity. We report an unusual case of A-T in a 41-year-old mother, A-T210, who had very mild neurological symptoms despite complete loss of ATM protein.

9452093
Novel exonic mutation (5319 G to A) resulting in two aberrantly spliced transcripts of the ATM gene in a Japanese patient with ataxia-telangiectasia


33442023
Prevalence of pathogenic germline variants in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
Purpose:
        
      
      Germline pathogenic variants are estimated to affect 3-5% of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. However, higher mutational prevalence in non-clear cell RCC (non-ccRCC) and advanced disease has been suggested.

23946315
Ataxia telangiectasia presenting as dopa-responsive cervical dystonia
Objective:
        
      
      To identify the cause of cervical dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) in a Muslim Indian family inherited in an apparently autosomal recessive fashion, as previously described in this journal.

29141312
[Clinical manifestation and gene analyses of 15 patients with intellectual disability or developmental delay complicated with congenital nystagmus]
Objective: To analyze the clinical and genetic features of 15 cases with intellectual disability or developmental delay (ID/DD) complicated with congenital nystagmus. Method: The clinical characteristics and the results of laboratory tests, images and genetics of 15 patients with ID/DD complicated with congenital nystagmus, confirmed by gene diagnosis in the Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Capital Institute of Pediatrics from March 2015 to October 2016, were retrospectively analyzed. The physiological function of 13 disease genes and the molecular signaling pathways were also comparatively studied. Result: The patients included 11 males and four females, with an age of 2 months-15 years (median age 27 months). The result of multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was positive in two patients only with hypomyelination on head MRI. Positive results were found in 13 patients with or without abnormal head MRI or other deformities using targeted capture technology and next generation sequencing. Two patients were diagnosed with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, two had hypomyelination with an atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum and two had oculocutaneous albinism. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease was found in one case, cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome in one case, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome in one case, mental retardation type 5 in one case, methylmalonic aciduria combined with hyperhomocysteinemia in 1 case, ataxia telangiectasia in one case, hypomyelinating leukodystrophy type 8 in one case, Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome in one case and CHARGE syndrome in one case. A total of 12 novo mutations were reported in this study. Conclusion: The causes of children with ID/DD complicated with congenital nystagmusis are complex. Comprehensive clinical and auxiliary examinations should be performed to improve the accuracy of the diagnosis. Reasonable application of different genetic testing methods can significantly improve the diagnostic accuracy of molecular genetic etiology in children with ID/DD.

33011440
Improving Genetic Testing in Hereditary Cancer by RNA Analysis: Tools to Prioritize Splicing Studies and Challenges in Applying American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Guidelines
RNA analyses are a potent tool to identify spliceogenic effects of DNA variants, although they are time-consuming and cannot always be performed. We present splicing assays of 20 variants that represent a variety of mutation types in 10 hereditary cancer genes and attempt to incorporate these results into American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) classification guidelines. Sixteen single-nucleotide variants, 3 exon duplications, and 1 single-exon deletion were selected and prioritized by in silico algorithms. RNA was extracted from short-term lymphocyte cultures to perform RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing, and allele-specific expression was assessed whenever possible. Aberrant transcripts were detected in 14 variants (70%). Variant interpretation was difficult, especially comparing old classification standards to generic ACMG guidelines and a proposal was devised to weigh functional analyses at RNA level. According to the ACMG guidelines, only 12 variants were reclassified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic because the other two variants did not gather enough evidence. This study highlights the importance of RNA studies to improve variant classification. However, it also indicates the challenge of incorporating these results into generic ACMG guidelines and the need to refine these criteria gene specifically. Nevertheless, 60% of variants were reclassified, thus improving genetic counseling and surveillance for carriers of these variants.

30279714
A Novel Splice Site Mutation of the ATM Gene Associated with Ataxia Telangiectasia
Objectives:
        
      
      Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation in the Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. This disorder is characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency and a predisposition to leukemia/lymphoma. In this study, we investigated a family with a new mutation in ATM, confirmed by molecular genetic test.

17582598
ATM sequence variants associate with susceptibility to non-small cell lung cancer
ATM gene mutations have been implicated in many human cancers. However, the role of ATM polymorphisms in lung carcinogenesis is largely unexplored. We conducted a case-control analysis of 556 Caucasian non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and 556 controls frequency-matched on age, gender and smoking status. We genotyped 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms of the ATM gene and found that compared with the wild-type allele-containing genotypes, the homozygous variant genotypes of ATM08 (rs227060) and ATM10 (rs170548) were associated with elevated NSCLC risk with ORs of 1.55 (95% CI: 1.02-2.35) and 1.51 (0.99-2.31), respectively. ATM haplotypes and diplotypes were inferred using the Expectation-Maximization algorithm. Haplotype H5 was significantly associated with reduced NSCLC risk in former smokers with an OR of 0.47 (0.25-0.96) compared with the common H1 haplotype. Compared with the H1-H2 diplotype, H2-H2 and H3-H4 diplotypes were associated with increased NSCLC risk with ORs of 1.58 (0.99-2.54) and 2.29 (1.05-5.00), respectively. We then evaluated genotype-phenotype correlation in the control group using the comet assay to determine DNA damage and DNA repair capacity. Compared with individuals with at least 1 wild-type allele, the homozygous variant carriers of either ATM08 or ATM10 exhibited significantly increased DNA damage as evidenced by a higher mean value of the radiation-induced olive tail moment (ATM08: 4.86 +/- 2.43 vs. 3.79 +/- 1.51, p = 0.04; ATM10: 5.14 +/- 2.37 vs. 3.79 +/- 1.54, p = 0.01). Our study presents the first epidemiologic evidence that ATM genetic variants may affect NSCLC predisposition, and that the risk-conferring variants might act through down-regulating the functions of ATM in DNA repair activity upon genetic insults such as ionizing radiation.

32552793
Analysis of transcript-deleterious variants in Mendelian disorders: implications for RNA-based diagnostics
Background:
        
      
      At least 50% of patients with suspected Mendelian disorders remain undiagnosed after whole-exome sequencing (WES), and the extent to which non-coding variants that are not captured by WES contribute to this fraction is unclear. Whole transcriptome sequencing is a promising supplement to WES, although empirical data on the contribution of RNA analysis to the diagnosis of Mendelian diseases on a large scale are scarce.

28170084
Debunking Occam's razor: Diagnosing multiple genetic diseases in families by whole-exome sequencing
Background:
        
      
      Recent clinical whole exome sequencing (WES) cohorts have identified unanticipated multiple genetic diagnoses in single patients. However, the frequency of multiple genetic diagnoses in families is largely unknown.

28195393
Use of multigene-panel identifies pathogenic variants in several CRC-predisposing genes in patients previously tested for Lynch Syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Many families with a high burden of colorectal cancer fulfil the clinical criteria for Lynch Syndrome. However, in about half of these families, no germline mutation in the mismatch repair genes known to be associated with this disease can be identified. The aim of this study was to find the genetic cause for the increased colorectal cancer risk in these unsolved cases.

23632773
Variant ataxia telangiectasia: clinical and molecular findings and evaluation of radiosensitive phenotypes in a patient and relatives
Variant ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) may be an underdiagnosed entity. We correlate data from radiosensitivity and kinase assays with clinical and molecular data from a patient with variant A-T and relatives. The coding region of ATM was sequenced. To evaluate the functional effect of the mutations, we performed kinase assays and developed a novel S-G2 micronucleus test. Our patient presented with mild dystonia, moderately dysarthric speech, increased serum α-fetoprotein but no ataxia nor telangiectasias, no nystagmus or oculomotor dyspraxia. She has a severe IgA deficiency, but does not have recurrent infections. She is compound heterozygote for ATM c.8122G>A (p.Asp2708Asn) and c.8851-1G>T, leading to in frame loss of 63 nucleotides at the cDNA level. A trace amount of ATM protein is translated from both alleles. Residual kinase activity is derived only from the p.Asp2708Asn allele. The conventional G0 micronucleus test, based on irradiation of resting lymphocytes, revealed a radiosensitive phenotype for the patient, but not for the heterozygous relatives. As ATM is involved in homologous recombination and G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, we optimized an S-G2 micronucleus assay, allowing to evaluate micronuclei in lymphocytes irradiated in the S and G2 phases. This test showed increased radiosensitivity for both the patient and the heterozygous carriers. Intriguingly, heterozygous carriers of c.8851-1G>T (mutation associated with absence of kinase activity) showed a stronger radiosensitive phenotype with this assay than heterozygous carriers of p.Asp2708Asn (mutation associated with residual kinase activity). The modified S-G2 micronucleus assay provided phenotypic insight into complement the diagnosis of this atypical A-T patient.

16497724
Genetic polymorphisms of ataxia telangiectasia mutated affect lung cancer risk
The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene is known to be activated by DNA damage and involved in cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and DNA repair. Therefore, ATM gene polymorphisms may act as important factors predicting individual susceptibility to lung cancer. To evaluate the role of ATM gene polymorphisms in lung cancer development, genotypes of the ATM polymorphisms, -4518A>G, IVS21-77C>T, IVS61-55T>C, and IVS62+60G>A, were determined in 616 lung cancer patients and 616 cancer-free controls. When the effects of selected ATM genotypes were evaluated separately, only one ATM genotype (IVS62+60G>A) showed an association with lung cancer risk. Subjects with the A allele at the site (IVS62+60G>A) have significantly higher risk of lung cancer than those with the G allele [odds ratio (OR)=1.6, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1-2.1]. When the haplotypes of four ATM single nucleotide polymorphism sites (-4518A>G, IVS21-77C>T, IVS61-55T>C and IVS62+60G>A) were studied, the ATTA haplotype showed significantly increased risk of lung cancer compared with the GCCA haplotype, the most common haplotype (OR=7.6, 95% CI 1.7-33.5). Furthermore, subjects with the (NN)TA haplotype showed highly significant and increased risk of lung cancer when compared with those without the (NN)TA haplotype (OR=13.2, 95% CI 3.1-56.1). Therefore, our results suggest that polymorphisms or haplotypes of the ATM gene play an important role in the development of lung cancer.

31948886
Rare Germline Pathogenic Mutations of DNA Repair Genes Are Most Strongly Associated with Grade Group 5 Prostate Cancer
Background:
        
      
      Rare germline mutations in several genes, primarily DNA repair genes, have been proposed to predict worse prognosis of prostate cancer (PCa).

20816691
A functional single nucleotide polymorphism in promoter of ATM is associated with longevity
Although the 'ataxia telangiectasia mutated' (ATM) gene plays an important role in physiological processes, such as sensing DNA damage, reducing oxidative stress and protecting telomeres length, little information about ATM and longevity is available. Therefore, we aim to examine the association between genetic variants in promoter of ATM and longevity in Chinese Nonagenarians/Centenarians. Genotyping was performed in 789 long-lived individuals (LLIs) and 886 ethnically matched control subjects. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs189037) in the promoter region of ATM gene was identified, and significant association between CT genotype and longevity was observed. Meanwhile, the SNP was able to affect expression of ATM mRNA by differentially binding to AP-2α. The CC genotype strongly bound to AP-2α, and the TT genotype showed less binding affinity to AP-2α. The AP-2α strongly repressed the reporter expression in the CC genotype and showed less repression of the TT genotype driving expression in vitro assay. Accordingly, TT genotype individuals had highest ATM mRNA expression, CT genotype individuals had moderate ATM mRNA expression, and the CC genotype individuals had the lowest ATM mRNA.

21108427
Association between DNA repair gene ATM polymorphisms and oral cancer susceptibility
Objectives/hypothesis:
        
      
      The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is thought to play a major role in the caretaking of the overall genome stability, and its mutations have been implicated in human cancers. However, the role of ATM polymorphisms in oral carcinogenesis is largely unexplored. Thus, the polymorphic variants of ATM were first investigated for their association with oral cancer susceptibility.

20004998
ATM polymorphisms and risk of lung cancer among never smokers
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, an important caretaker of overall genome stability, is thought to play a role in the development of human malignancy. Therefore, we hypothesized that sequence variants in ATM may influence the disposition to lung cancer. In this hospital-based matched case-control study, nine ATM single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs189037, rs228597, rs228592, rs664677, rs609261, rs599558, rs609429, rs227062, and rs664982) were genotyped in 730 lung cancer patients and 730 healthy controls. Pairwise linkage disequilibrium among nine polymorphisms in the ATM gene was very high. None of the main effects of any of the ATM polymorphisms were related to the risk of lung cancer. Interestingly, ATM polymorphisms were significantly associated with lung cancer among never smokers, and the association was modulated by low-level exposure to carcinogens such as environmental tobacco smoke. When the haplotypes of nine ATM polymorphism sites were studied, no overall association between ATM haplotypes and risk of lung cancer was found. However, the frequency distribution of haplotypes between lung cancer cases and controls was significant in the never smokers (P=0.009), demonstrating that haplotypes have a significant effect on the risk of lung cancer. In conclusion, we found that never smokers with sequence variants of the ATM gene may be at increased risk for lung cancer. Our data also suggest this association may be further modified by exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. This study suggests support to the literature that ATM polymorphisms and environmental tobacco smoke exposure have a role in lung carcinogenesis among never smokers.

11889466
A new type of mutation causes a splicing defect in ATM
Disease-causing splicing mutations described in the literature primarily produce changes in splice sites and, to a lesser extent, variations in exon-regulatory sequences such as the enhancer elements. The gene ATM is mutated in individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia; we have identified the aberrant inclusion of a cryptic exon of 65 bp in one affected individual with a deletion of four nucleotides (GTAA) in intron 20. The deletion is located 12 bp downstream and 53 bp upstream from the 5' and 3' ends of the cryptic exon, respectively. Through analysis of the splicing defect using a hybrid minigene system, we identified a new intron-splicing processing element (ISPE) complementary to U1 snRNA, the RNA component of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP). This element mediates accurate intron processing and interacts specifically with U1 snRNP particles. The 4-nt deletion completely abolished this interaction, causing activation of the cryptic exon. On the basis of this analysis, we describe a new type of U1 snRNP binding site in an intron that is essential for accurate intron removal. Deletion of this sequence is directly involved in the splicing processing defect.

19773425
An Alu-derived intronic splicing enhancer facilitates intronic processing and modulates aberrant splicing in ATM
We have previously reported a natural GTAA deletion within an intronic splicing processing element (ISPE) of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene that disrupts a non-canonical U1 snRNP interaction and activates the excision of the upstream portion of the intron. The resulting pre-mRNA splicing intermediate is then processed to a cryptic exon, whose aberrant inclusion in the final mRNA is responsible for ataxia telangiectasia. We show here that the last 40 bases of a downstream intronic antisense Alu repeat are required for the activation of the cryptic exon by the ISPE deletion. Evaluation of the pre-mRNA splicing intermediate by a hybrid minigene assay indicates that the identified intronic splicing enhancer represents a novel class of enhancers that facilitates processing of splicing intermediates possibly by recruiting U1 snRNP to defective donor sites. In the absence of this element, the splicing intermediate accumulates and is not further processed to generate the cryptic exon. Our results indicate that Alu-derived sequences can provide intronic splicing regulatory elements that facilitate pre-mRNA processing and potentially affect the severity of disease-causing splicing mutations.

33624863
The Complex Genetic Landscape of Hereditary Ataxias in Turkey and Implications in Clinical Practice
Background:
        
      
      The genetic and epidemiological features of hereditary ataxias have been reported in several populations; however, Turkey is still unexplored. Due to high consanguinity, recessive ataxias are more common in Turkey than in Western European populations.

28528518
A multi-gene panel study in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in Colombia
Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for approximately 50% of inherited breast and ovarian cancers. Three founder mutations in BRCA1/2 have been reported in Colombia, but the pattern of mutations in other cancer susceptibility genes is unknown. This study describes the frequency and type of germline mutations in hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer genes in a referral cancer center in Colombia. Eighty-five women referred to the oncogenetics unit of the Instituto de Cancerologia Las Americas in Medellin (Colombia), meeting testing criteria for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (NCCN 2015), who had germline testing with a commercial 25-gene hereditary cancer panel, were included in the analysis. Nineteen patients (22.4%) carried a deleterious germline mutation in a cancer susceptibility gene: BRCA1 (7), BRCA2 (8), PALB2 (1), ATM (1), MSH2 (1) and PMS2 (1). The frequency of mutations in BRCA1/2 was 17.6%. One BRCA2 mutation (c.9246dupG) was recurrent in five non-related individuals and is not previously reported in the country. Seventeen mutation-carriers had a diagnosis of breast cancer (median age of diagnosis of 36 years) and two of ovarian cancer. All BRCA1 mutation-carriers with breast cancer had triple negative tumors (median age of diagnosis of 31 years). Variants of unknown significance were reported in 35% of test results. This is the first report of a multi-gene study for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer in a Latin American country. We found a high frequency and a wide spectrum of germline mutations in cancer susceptibility genes in Colombian patients, some of which were not previously reported in the country. We observed a very low frequency of known Colombian founder BRCA1/2 mutations (1.2%) and we found mutations in other genes such as PALB2, ATM, MSH2 and PMS2. Our results highlight the importance of performing multi-gene panel testing, including comprehensive BRCA1/2 analysis (full gene sequencing and large rearrangement analysis), in high-risk breast and/or ovarian cancer patients in Colombia.

18575927
Attenuated presentation of ataxia-telangiectasia with familial cancer history


30639167
A novel ATM mutation associated with elevated atypical lymphocyte populations, hyper-IgM, and cutaneous granulomas
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) is an immunodeficiency most often associated with T cell abnormalities. We describe a patient with a hyper-IgM phenotype and immune cell abnormalities that suggest a distinct clinical phenotype. Significant B cell abnormalities with increased unswitched memory B cells, decreased naive transitional B cells, and an elevated frequency of CD19+CD38loCD27-CD10-CD21-/low B cells expressing high levels of T-bet and Fas were demonstrated. The B cells were hyporesponsive to in vitro stimulation through the B cell receptor, Toll like receptors (TLR) 7 and 9, and CD40. T cell homeostasis was also disturbed with a significant increase in γδ T cells, circulating T follicular helper cells (Tfh), and decreased numbers of T regulatory cells. The ATM mutations in this patient are posited to have resulted in the perturbations in the frequencies and distributions of B and T cell subsets, resulting in the phenotype in this patient. KEY MESSAGES: A novel mutation creating a premature stop codon and a nonsense mutation in the ATM gene are postulated to have resulted in the unique clinical picture characterized by abnormal B and T cell populations, lymphocyte subset dysfunction, granuloma formation, and a hyper-IgM phenotype. CAPSULE SUMMARY: A patient presented with ataxia-telangiectasia, cutaneous granulomas, and a hyper-IgM phenotype; a novel combination of mutations in the ATM gene was associated with abnormal distributions, frequencies, and function of T and B lymphocyte subsets.

30420857
Pre-emptive Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Ataxia Telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a primary immunodeficiency with mutations in the gene encoding the A-T mutated (ATM) protein that interacts with immune, hematopoietic, and endocrine targets resulting in broad multi-systemic clinical manifestations with a devastating outcome. Apart from a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, A-T leads to significantly increased susceptibility to malignancies. It is a matter of discussion whether pre-emptive allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (alloHSCT) using a reduced intensity conditioning regimen would be an option to restore immune-competence and prevent malignancy, as shown in animal models, because conventional treatment protocols of malignant diseases using radio- and/or chemotherapy have a high rate of therapy-related morbidity and mortality in these patients. We present the course of the disease, including immune reconstitution and neurological outcome following pre-emptive alloHSCT in a 4-year-old boy with A-T on a 6 year follow-up. Our manuscript provides a proof-of-concept of alloHSCT as an individual pre-emptive treatment strategy from which some A-T patients might benefit.

21893220
A girl with an atypical form of ataxia telangiectasia and an additional de novo 3.14 Mb microduplication in region 19q12
A 9-year-old girl born to healthy parents showed manifestations suggestive of ataxia telangiectasia (AT), such as short stature, sudden short bouts of horizontal and rotary nystagmus, a weak and dysarthric voice, rolling gait, unstable posture, and atactic movements. She did not show several cardinal features typical of AT such as frequent, severe infections of the respiratory tract. In contrast, she showed symptoms not generally related to AT, including microcephaly, profound motor and mental retardation, small hands and feet, severely and progressively reduced muscle tone with slackly protruding abdomen and undue drooling, excess fat on her upper arms, and severe oligoarthritis. A cranial MRI showed no cerebellar hypoplasia and other abnormalities. In peripheral blood samples she carried a de novo duplication of 3.14 Mb in chromosomal region 19q12 containing six annotated genes, UQCRFS1, VSTM2B, POP4, PLEKHF1, CCNE1, and ZNF536, and a de novo mosaic inversion 14q11q32 (96% of metaphases). In a saliva-derived DNA sample only the duplication in 19q12 was detected, suggesting that the rearrangements in blood lymphocytes were acquired. These findings reinforced the suspicion that she had AT. AT was confirmed by strongly elevated serum AFP levels, cellular radiosensitivity and two inherited mutations in the ATM gene (c.510_511delGT; paternal origin and c.2922-50_2940del69; maternal origin). This case suggest that a defective ATM-dependent DNA damage response may entail additional stochastic genomic rearrangements. Screening for genomic rearrangements appears indicated in patients suspected of defective DNA damage responses.

27878467
Outcomes of retesting BRCA negative patients using multigene panels
The utility of multigene panels in retesting patients who previously tested negative for a pathogenic mutation by BRCA1/2 testing is not well established. Patients who previously tested negative for a pathogenic BRCA1/2 mutation by standard sequencing, and who were seen in cancer genetics center between November 1, 2012 and June 30, 2015 for additional testing utilizing multigene panels, were identified using our genetic testing registry. Data on demographics, personal and family history of cancer, results of panel testing and the impact on patient management was collected retrospectively. A total of 122 patients underwent retesting during the study period. Thirteen (11%) pathogenic mutations were identified in the following genes: CHEK2(4), PALB2(3), ATM(2), CDH1, APC, BARD1 and MRE11A. Eleven out of these thirteen mutations were deemed actionable based on published guidelines. Of these eleven, seven patients had an actual change in clinical management as a result of retesting. Furthermore, retesting also led to a change in clinical management in the two patients with mutations in genes (BARD1 and MRE11A) which do not have clear guidelines for management. There were no significant differences in demographics and personal and family history of cancer between patients who tested positive and those who tested negative on retesting. This study demonstrates the clinical utility of multigene panels in a group of high risk individuals who previously tested negative for a BRCA1/2 mutation. This retesting approach revealed a pathogenic mutation in 11% of cases. Retesting led to significant change in clinical management in a majority of patients with actionable mutations (7 out of 11), as well as in those with mutations in genes which do not have specific management guidelines.

8789452
Mutations revealed by sequencing the 5' half of the gene for ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia is a recessive disorder in which patients show a progressive cerebellar degeneration leading to ataxia, abnormal eye movements and deterioration of speech. Other features include ocular telangiectasia, high serum AFP levels, immunodeficiency, growth retardation and an increased predisposition to some tumours, particularly T cell leukaemia and lymphoma. We report the 1348 amino acid sequence of the N-terminal half of the A-T gene product which, together with the previously published C-terminal half, completes the sequence of the A-T protein. No homologies with other genes have been found within the N-terminal half of the A-T protein. We have also identified six mutations affecting the N-terminal half of the protein. One of these mutations was found to be associated with a haplotype that is common to four apparently unrelated families of Irish descent. All the patients so far examined for both A-T alleles were shown to be compound heterozygotes. None of these mutations affected a putative promoter region which may direct divergent transcription of both the A-T gene and a novel gene E14. The ability to recognise mutations across the entire coding sequence of the A-T gene provides a practical advantage to A-T families since a DNA based prenatal diagnosis will be possible in families where the mutations are identified irrespective of the level of radiosensitivity in these families.

16387360
Development of a mantle cell lymphoma in an ATM heterozygous woman after occupational exposure to ionising radiation and somatic mutation of the second allele
Predisposition to lymphomagenesis is a well-known phenomenon of ataxia-telangiectasia, a recessive disorder caused by germline inactivation of ATM. ATM encodes a protein implicated in the repair of radiation induced double-strand breaks. Biallelic ATM inactivation was described also in sporadic lymphoid malignancies, supporting a role of ATM as a tumour suppressor gene. It is, however, still unclear whether ATM heterozygotes are at higher risk of tumours. We describe an ATM heterozygous patient, who developed a mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) after occupational exposure to ionising radiation and somatic mutation of the second ATM allele supporting the contention that heterozygous germline ATM alterations in combination with irradiation exposure predisposes to sporadic MCL.

29348823
Prevalence of pathogenic germline variants detected by multigene sequencing in unselected Japanese patients with ovarian cancer
Pathogenic germline BRCA1, BRCA2 (BRCA1/2), and several other gene variants predispose women to primary ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal carcinoma (OC), although variant frequency and relevance information is scarce in Japanese women with OC. Using targeted panel sequencing, we screened 230 unselected Japanese women with OC from our hospital-based cohort for pathogenic germline variants in 75 or 79 OC-associated genes. Pathogenic variants of 11 genes were identified in 41 (17.8%) women: 19 (8.3%; BRCA1), 8 (3.5%; BRCA2), 6 (2.6%; mismatch repair genes), 3 (1.3%; RAD51D), 2 (0.9%; ATM), 1 (0.4%; MRE11A), 1 (FANCC), and 1 (GABRA6). Carriers of BRCA1/2 or any other tested gene pathogenic variants were more likely to be diagnosed younger, have first or second-degree relatives with OC, and have OC classified as high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC). After adjustment for these variables, all 3 features were independent predictive factors for pathogenic variants in any tested genes whereas only the latter two remained for variants in BRCA1/2. Our data indicate similar variant prevalence in Japanese patients with OC and other ethnic groups and suggest that HGSC and OC family history may facilitate genetic predisposition prediction in Japanese patients with OC and referring high-risk patients for genetic counseling and testing.

34153142
Genes affecting ionizing radiation survival identified through combined exome sequencing and functional screening
The study of genetic syndromes characterized by sensitivity to DNA damaging agents has provided important insights into the mechanisms that maintain genome stability and identified novel targets for cancer therapies. Here, we used exome sequencing to study 51 unrelated individuals with previously reported hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation as well as a range of neurologic, immunologic, and developmental features, but who did not clearly fit any previously defined genetic syndrome. Based on the combination of variant identification, computational evidence of deleteriousness, and functional screening, we identified three groups of subjects. Two subjects carried the bi-allelic loss of function variants in causative genes for known DNA damage response syndromes. Eight subjects carried the single loss of function variants in causative genes for DNA damage response syndromes, six of whom also carried predicted deleterious variants in other genes with DNA damage-related functions. Three subjects carried deleterious mutations in genes without obvious roles in DNA damage responses. However, treatment of U2OS cells with small interfering RNA targeting these genes resulted in significantly increased radiation sensitivity. Our results suggest that gene-gene interaction may contribute to ionizing radiation sensitivity as well as highlighting possible roles for several genes not obviously involved in the response to DNA damage.

24733792
Clinical evaluation of a multiple-gene sequencing panel for hereditary cancer risk assessment
Purpose:
        
      
      Multiple-gene sequencing is entering practice, but its clinical value is unknown. We evaluated the performance of a customized germline-DNA sequencing panel for cancer-risk assessment in a representative clinical sample.

26182300
Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond
Importance:
        
      
      E-cadherin (CDH1) is a cancer predisposition gene mutated in families meeting clinically defined hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). Reliable estimates of cancer risk and spectrum in germline mutation carriers are essential for management. For families without CDH1 mutations, genetic-based risk stratification has not been possible, resulting in limited clinical options.

26658419
Whole Genome Sequencing Defines the Genetic Heterogeneity of Familial Pancreatic Cancer
Pancreatic cancer is projected to become the second leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States by 2020. A familial aggregation of pancreatic cancer has been established, but the cause of this aggregation in most families is unknown. To determine the genetic basis of susceptibility in these families, we sequenced the germline genomes of 638 patients with familial pancreatic cancer and the tumor exomes of 39 familial pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Our analyses support the role of previously identified familial pancreatic cancer susceptibility genes such as BRCA2, CDKN2A, and ATM, and identify novel candidate genes harboring rare, deleterious germline variants for further characterization. We also show how somatic point mutations that occur during hematopoiesis can affect the interpretation of genome-wide studies of hereditary traits. Our observations have important implications for the etiology of pancreatic cancer and for the identification of susceptibility genes in other common cancer types.

28591191
Reanalysis of BRCA1/2 negative high risk ovarian cancer patients reveals novel germline risk loci and insights into missing heritability
While up to 25% of ovarian cancer (OVCA) cases are thought to be due to inherited factors, the majority of genetic risk remains unexplained. To address this gap, we sought to identify previously undescribed OVCA risk variants through the whole exome sequencing (WES) and candidate gene analysis of 48 women with ovarian cancer and selected for high risk of genetic inheritance, yet negative for any known pathogenic variants in either BRCA1 or BRCA2. In silico SNP analysis was employed to identify suspect variants followed by validation using Sanger DNA sequencing. We identified five pathogenic variants in our sample, four of which are in two genes featured on current multi-gene panels; (RAD51D, ATM). In addition, we found a pathogenic FANCM variant (R1931*) which has been recently implicated in familial breast cancer risk. Numerous rare and predicted to be damaging variants of unknown significance were detected in genes on current commercial testing panels, most prominently in ATM (n = 6) and PALB2 (n = 5). The BRCA2 variant p.K3326*, resulting in a 93 amino acid truncation, was overrepresented in our sample (odds ratio = 4.95, p = 0.01) and coexisted in the germline of these women with other deleterious variants, suggesting a possible role as a modifier of genetic penetrance. Furthermore, we detected loss of function variants in non-panel genes involved in OVCA relevant pathways; DNA repair and cell cycle control, including CHEK1, TP53I3, REC8, HMMR, RAD52, RAD1, POLK, POLQ, and MCM4. In summary, our study implicates novel risk loci as well as highlights the clinical utility for retesting BRCA1/2 negative OVCA patients by genomic sequencing and analysis of genes in relevant pathways.

27484032
Rapid molecular diagnostics of severe primary immunodeficiency determined by using targeted next-generation sequencing
Background:
        
      
      Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDDs) are inherited disorders of the immune system. The most severe form, severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), presents with profound deficiencies of T cells, B cells, or both at birth. If not treated promptly, affected patients usually do not live beyond infancy because of infections. Genetic heterogeneity of SCID frequently delays the diagnosis; a specific diagnosis is crucial for life-saving treatment and optimal management.

29915322
Rare germline variants in DNA repair genes and the angiogenesis pathway predispose prostate cancer patients to develop metastatic disease
Background:
        
      
      Prostate cancer (PrCa) demonstrates a heterogeneous clinical presentation ranging from largely indolent to lethal. We sought to identify a signature of rare inherited variants that distinguishes between these two extreme phenotypes.

31216378
Frequency and phenotypic spectrum of KMT2B dystonia in childhood: A single-center cohort study
Background:
        
      
      Childhood-onset dystonia is often genetically determined. Recently, KMT2B variants have been recognized as an important cause of childhood-onset dystonia.

34199532
Germline Mutations Including the Rare Pathogenic Variant c.3206delC in the ATM Gene Cause Ataxia Teleangiectasia-Associated Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma
We here report the case of a 2-year-old patient with a primary central nervous system lymphoma of B-cell origin. Due to their past medical history of repeated respiratory tract infections and the marked chemotherapy-associated toxicity and infectious comorbidity, we suspected that the patient also suffered from an inherited immune deficiency disorder. Despite the lack of classical pathognomonic symptoms for ataxia teleangiectasia and missing evidence for a cancer predisposition syndrome in the family, genetic testing identified biallelic germline mutations, including the rare pathogenic variant c.3206delC (p.Pro1069Leufs*2), in the ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene. The case highlights the importance of searching for immune deficiency disorders associated with primary central nervous system lymphoma before treatment initiation and the urgent need to develop novel treatment strategies for cancer patients with underlying immunodeficiency syndromes.

33083013
Genomic testing in 1019 individuals from 349 Pakistani families results in high diagnostic yield and clinical utility
We implemented a collaborative diagnostic program in Lahore (Pakistan) aiming to establish the genetic diagnosis, and to asses diagnostic yield and clinical impact in patients with suspected genetic diseases. Local physicians ascertained pediatric patients who had no previous access to genetic testing. More than 1586 genetic tests were performed in 1019 individuals (349 index cases, 670 relatives). Most frequently performed tests were exome/genome sequencing (ES/GS, 284/78 index cases) and specific gene panels (55 index cases). In 61.3% of the patients (n = 214) a genetic diagnosis was established based on pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants. Diagnostic yield was higher in consanguineous families (60.1 vs. 39.5%). In 27 patients, genetic diagnosis relied on additional biochemical testing, allowing rapid assessment of the functional effect of the variants. Remarkably, the genetic diagnosis had a direct impact on clinical management. Most relevant consequences were therapy related such as initiation of the appropriated treatment in a timely manner in 51.9% of the patients (n = 111). Finally, we report 12 candidate genes among 66 cases with no genetic diagnosis. Importantly, three of these genes were validated as 'diagnostic' genes given the strong evidence supporting causality derived from our data repository (CAP2-dilated cardiomyopathy, ITFG2-intellectual disability and USP53-liver cholestasis). The high diagnostic yield, clinical impact, and research findings demonstrate the utility of genomic testing, especially when used as first-line genetic test. For patients with suspected genetic diseases from resource-limited regions, ES can be considered as the test of choice to achieve genetic diagnosis.

26822949
Hereditary truncating mutations of DNA repair and other genes in BRCA1/BRCA2/PALB2-negatively tested breast cancer patients
Hereditary breast cancer comprises a minor but clinically meaningful breast cancer (BC) subgroup. Mutations in the major BC-susceptibility genes are important prognostic and predictive markers; however, their carriers represent only 25% of high-risk BC patients. To further characterize variants influencing BC risk, we performed SOLiD sequencing of 581 genes in 325 BC patients (negatively tested in previous BRCA1/BRCA2/PALB2 analyses). In 105 (32%) patients, we identified and confirmed 127 truncating variants (89 unique; nonsense, frameshift indels, and splice site), 19 patients harbored more than one truncation. Forty-six (36 unique) truncating variants in 25 DNA repair genes were found in 41 (12%) patients, including 16 variants in the Fanconi anemia (FA) genes. The most frequent variant in FA genes was c.1096_1099dupATTA in FANCL that also show a borderline association with increased BC risk in subsequent analysis of enlarged groups of BC patients and controls. Another 81 (53 unique) truncating variants were identified in 48 non-DNA repair genes in 74 patients (23%) including 16 patients carrying variants in genes coding proteins of estrogen metabolism/signaling. Our results highlight the importance of mutations in the FA genes' family, and indicate that estrogen metabolism genes may reveal a novel candidate genetic component for BC susceptibility.

29445900
Clinical interpretation of pathogenic ATM and CHEK2 variants on multigene panel tests: navigating moderate risk
Comprehensive genomic cancer risk assessment (GCRA) helps patients, family members, and providers make informed choices about cancer screening, surgical and chemotherapeutic risk reduction, and genetically targeted cancer therapies. The increasing availability of multigene panel tests for clinical applications allows testing of well-defined high-risk genes, as well as moderate-risk genes, for which the penetrance and spectrum of cancer risk are less well characterized. Moderate-risk genes are defined as genes that, when altered by a pathogenic variant, confer a 2 to fivefold relative risk of cancer. Two such genes included on many comprehensive cancer panels are the DNA repair genes ATM and CHEK2, best known for moderately increased risk of breast cancer development. However, the impact of screening and preventative interventions and spectrum of cancer risk beyond breast cancer associated with ATM and/or CHEK2 variants remain less well characterized. We convened a large, multidisciplinary, cross-sectional panel of GCRA clinicians to review challenging, peer-submitted cases of patients identified with ATM or CHEK2 variants. This paper summarizes the inter-professional case discussion and recommendations generated during the session, the level of concordance with respect to recommendations between the academic and community clinician participants for each case, and potential barriers to implementing recommended care in various practice settings.

31871297
Germline DNA Sequencing Reveals Novel Mutations Predictive of Overall Survival in a Cohort of Patients with Pancreatic Cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Family history of BRCA-related tumors may correlate with response to chemotherapy and overall survival (OS) in pancreatic cancer. The frequency of germline mutations has been reported in patients predominantly under the age of 60 or with strong family history. We examine the incidence of deleterious germline mutations and compare the chemotherapy responses and OS in an unselected group of patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer.

27913932
Almost 2% of Spanish breast cancer families are associated to germline pathogenic mutations in the ATM gene
Purpose:
        
      
      There is still a considerable percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) cases not explained by BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. In this report, next-generation sequencing (NGS) techniques were applied to identify novel variants and/or genes involved in HBOC susceptibility.

10611590
Fatal outcome in two girls with hodgkin disease complicating ataxia-telangiectasia (Louis-Bar syndrome) despite favorable response to modified-dose chemotherapy


17632790
Ataxia-telangiectasia: mild neurological presentation despite null ATM mutation and severe cellular phenotype
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, susceptibility to cancer, genomic instability, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation. A-T is caused by mutations that eliminate or inactivate the nuclear protein kinase ATM, the chief activator of the cellular response to double strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. Mild A-T is usually caused by ATM mutations that leave residual amounts of active ATM. We studied two siblings with mild A-T, as defined by clinical examination and a quantitative A-T neurological index. Surprisingly, no ATM was detected in the patients' cells, and sequence analysis revealed that they were homozygous for a truncating ATM mutation (5653delA) that is expected to lead to the classical, severe neurological presentation. Moreover, the cellular phenotype of these patients was indistinguishable from that of classical A-T: all the tested parameters of the DSB response were severely defective as in typical A-T. This analysis shows that the severity of the neurological component of A-T is determined not only by ATM mutations but also by other influences yet to be found.

29093764
Clinical and genetic characterization of hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population
Background:
        
      
      Breast cancer develops as a result of multiple gene mutations in combination with environmental risk factors. Causative variants in genes such as BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 have been shown to account for hereditary nature of certain breast cancers. However,other genes, such as ATM, PALB2, BRIP1, CHEK, BARD1, while lower in frequency, may also increase breast cancer risk. There are few studies examining the role of these causative variants. Our study aimed to examine the clinical and genetic characterization of hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population.

9000145
Analysis of the ATM protein in wild-type and ataxia telangiectasia cells
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a human disorder that results in a number of clinical symptoms, including cerebellar degeneration and increased cancer predisposition. Recently the gene that is defective in A-T has been cloned and designated ATM. Here, we describe the production of antisera raised against the approximately 350 kDa ATM protein. Antisera specificity is confirmed by them recognising a approximately 350 kDa polypeptide in wild-type cells but not in A-T cells containing mutations that truncate ATM upstream of the antibody binding sites. We show that ATM is almost exclusively nuclear and is expressed in all cell lines and tissues analysed. However, ATM levels are not regulated in response to u.v. or ionising radiation. These data are consistent with ATM being a component of the DNA damage detection apparatus rather than being an inducible downstream effector of the DNA damage response. In addition, we analyse ATM protein expression in a variety of A-T patients. Strikingly, ATM expression is reduced drastically or absent in all patients analysed, including those predicted to express proteins that should be detected by our antisera. Thus, the A-T phenotype may result not only from mutations that disrupt functional domains of ATM, but also from mutations that destabilise the ATM mRNA or protein. Finally, we report that a group of patients displaying an intermediate A-T phenotype express low levels of apparently full-length ATM. This suggests that the ATM pathway is partially active in these individuals and that there is a correlation between levels of residual ATM expression and disease severity.

29163336
Two Novel Mutations Associated With Ataxia-Telangiectasia Identified Using an Ion AmpliSeq Inherited Disease Panel
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), or Louis-Bar syndrome, is a rare neurodegenerative disorder associated with immunodeficiency. For families with at least one affected child, timely A-T genotyping during any subsequent pregnancy allows the parents to make an informed decision about whether to continue to term when the fetus is affected. Mutations in the ATM gene, which is 150 kb long, give rise to A-T; more than 600 pathogenic variants in ATM have been characterized since 1990 and new mutations continue to be discovered annually. Therefore, limiting genetic screening to previously known SNPs by PCR or hybridization with microarrays may not identify the specific pathogenic genotype in ATM for a given A-T family. However, recent developments in next-generation sequencing technology offer prompt high-throughput full-length sequencing of genomic fragments of interest. This allows the identification of the whole spectrum of mutations in a gene, including any novel ones. We report two A-T families with affected children and current pregnancies. Both families are consanguineous and originate from Caucasian regions of Russia and Azerbaijan. Before our study, no ATM mutations had been identified in the older children of these families. We used ion semiconductor sequencing and an Ion AmpliSeq™ Inherited Disease Panel to perform complete ATM gene sequencing in a single member of each family. Then we compared the experimentally determined genotype with the affected/normal phenotype distribution in the whole family to provide unambiguous evidence of pathogenic mutations responsible for A-T. A single novel SNP was allocated to each family. In the first case, we found a mononucleotide deletion, and in the second, a mononucleotide insertion. Both mutations lead to truncation of the ATM protein product. Identification of the pathogenic mutation in each family was performed in a timely fashion, allowing the fetuses to be tested and diagnosed. The parents chose to continue with both pregnancies as both fetuses had a healthy genotype and thus were not at risk of A-T.

7792600
A single ataxia telangiectasia gene with a product similar to PI-3 kinase
A gene, ATM, that is mutated in the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia telangiectasia (AT) was identified by positional cloning on chromosome 11q22-23. AT is characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, cancer predisposition, radiation sensitivity, and cell cycle abnormalities. The disease is genetically heterogeneous, with four complementation groups that have been suspected to represent different genes. ATM, which has a transcript of 12 kilobases, was found to be mutated in AT patients from all complementation groups, indicating that it is probably the sole gene responsible for this disorder. A partial ATM complementary DNA clone of 5.9 kilobases encoded a putative protein that is similar to several yeast and mammalian phosphatidylinositol-3' kinases that are involved in mitogenic signal transduction, meiotic recombination, and cell cycle control. The discovery of ATM should enhance understanding of AT and related syndromes and may allow the identification of AT heterozygotes, who are at increased risk of cancer.

8797579
ATM mutations in cancer families
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a multisystem recessive disease characterized clinically by cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, immunodeficiency, sensitivity to radiomimetic agents, and cancer predisposition. This pleiotropic disorder is caused by mutations in the ATM (mutated in A-T) gene, which is located in the human chromosomal region 11q22-q23. The ATM gene product is a member of a novel family of large proteins implicated in the regulation of the cell cycle and response to DNA damage. Heterozygosity for A-T was previously suggested to be associated with an increased risk of tumors, particularly female breast cancer. Because of loss of constitutional heterozygosity at 11q22-q23 is a frequent event in breast and other tumors, suggesting the presence of a tumor suppressor gene(s) in this region, we screened blood DNA samples from 88 unrelated breast cancer patients of Swedish cancer families for ATM mutations using single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis. All patients had a family history of tumors previously associated with A-T heterozygosity or homozygosity. We demonstrate the first three germ-line mutations in ATM identified by screening of breast cancer patients. Two mutations were previously found in A-T homozygotes and one mutation was a 1-bp insertion. All mutations were found in families with a large number of tumors, however, they did not cosegregate with malignancies. Although the proportion of A-T carriers in this sample seems to be higher than expected by chance, larger studies and pooled data sets will be required to establish that an A-T allele confers cancer susceptibility in heterozygotes.

28898322
[New mutation in ATM gen in patient whith Ataxia Telangiectasia: Clinical case]
Introduction:
        
      
      The ataxia telangiectasia syndrome (AT) is a genetic disease with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with multisystem involvement and a broad clinical spectrum. It is caused by the mutation of the ATM gene, causing reduction or absence of the ATM proteinkinase, altering processes in the cell cycle, DNA repair and apoptosis. The objective of this article is to report the case of a patient with ataxia telangiectasia syndrome, caused by a mutation not previously reported in the literature.

28716242
A novel pathogenic variant in an Iranian Ataxia telangiectasia family revealed by next-generation sequencing followed by in silico analysis
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a neurodegenerative autosomal recessive disorder with the main characteristics of progressive cerebellar degeneration, sensitivity to ionizing radiation, immunodeficiency, telangiectasia, premature aging, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, and increased risk of malignancy, especially of lymphoid origin. Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated gene, ATM, as a causative gene for the A-T disorder, encodes the ATM protein, which plays an important role in the activation of cell-cycle checkpoints and initiation of DNA repair in response to DNA damage. Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on an Iranian 5-year-old boy presented with truncal and limb ataxia, telangiectasia of the eye, Hodgkin lymphoma, hyper pigmentation, total alopecia, hepatomegaly, and dysarthria. Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the candidate pathogenic variants. Computational docking was done using the HEX software to examine how this change affects the interactions of ATM with the upstream and downstream proteins. Three different variants were identified comprising two homozygous SNPs and one novel homozygous frameshift variant (c.80468047delTA, p.Thr2682ThrfsX5), which creates a stop codon in exon 57 leaving the protein truncated at its C-terminal portion. Therefore, the activation and phosphorylation of target proteins are lost. Moreover, the HEX software confirmed that the mutated protein lost its interaction with upstream and downstream proteins. The variant was classified as pathogenic based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guideline. This study expands the spectrum of ATM pathogenic variants in Iran and demonstrates the utility of targeted NGS in genetic diagnostics.

21778326
Functional characterization connects individual patient mutations in ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) with dysfunction of specific DNA double-strand break-repair signaling pathways
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) has multiple functions in homologous recombination (HR) and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), which lead to conflicting data regarding its DNA double-strand break-repair (DSBR) functions in previous studies. To explore the effect of clinically relevant ATM mutations, we characterized DSBR between mutated EGFP genes and ATM kinase signaling in 9 lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT) with defined vs. 3 control LCLs without ATM mutations. Our study revealed that the DSBR phenotype in AT cells is not uniform but appears to depend on the mutation, causing up to 32-fold increased or up to 3-fold decreased activities in particular pathways. Comparison with a further 10 LCLs mutated in downstream factors (BRCA1, BRCA2, Nibrin, Rad50, and Chk2) showed that the most diametrically opposed DSBR patterns in AT cells phenocopied NBN/RAD50 or BRCA1 mutations. Notably, reexpressing wild-type ATM reversed these defects by 2.3- to 3.5-fold. Our data suggest that ATM stimulates repair proteins such as Nibrin, which execute HR, single-strand annealing (SSA), and NHEJ. Concomitantly, ATM minimizes error-prone repair (SSA and NHEJ) through activation of surveillance factors such as BRCA1. Since the outcome of the individual defect can be diametrically opposed, distinguishing repair patterns in patients with ATM mutations may also be relevant regarding therapeutic responses.

18718650
Simultaneous presentation of 2 rare hereditary immunodeficiencies: IL-12 receptor beta1 deficiency and ataxia-telangiectasia


31118792
Mutation spectrum of germline cancer susceptibility genes among unselected Chinese colorectal cancer patients
Background: Genetic factors play an important role in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk, yet the prevalence and spectrum of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations among unselected Chinese CRC patients is largely undetermined. Methods: We performed next-generation sequencing with a 73-genes panel and analyzed the prevalence and spectrum of germline mutations in 618 unselected Chinese CRC patients. We classified all identified germline alterations for pathogenicity and calculated the frequencies of pathogenic mutations. Clinical characteristics were assessed by age and mutation status. Protein expressions and interactions of MLH1 missense variants were evaluated by western blot and co- immunoprecipitation. Results: Overall, 112 (18.1%) of 618 unselected Chinese CRC patients were found to carry at least one pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant (totaling 97 variants), including 70 (11.3%) Lynch syndrome (LS) mutation carriers and 42 (6.8%) non-LS mutation carriers. LS mutation carriers were significantly younger at CRC diagnosis and were more likely to have right-sided, poorly differentiated, early stage, high-frequency microsatellite instability (MSI-H) or dMMR CRC and a family history of cancer compared with noncarriers. Non-LS mutation carriers were more likely to be proficient mismatch repair (pMMR) than noncarriers (p=0.039). We found four clinical variables (gender, tumor histological stage, cancer stage and mutation status) that showed significant differences between patients younger and older than 50 years old. Higher mutation rates were found in patients under 50 years old (p=0.017). Thirty-three novel variants were discovered and evaluated as pathogenic mutations by our study. Conclusion: Given the high frequency and wide spectrum of mutations, genetic testing with a multigene panel should be considered for all Chinese CRC patients under 50 years old and is also needed to determine whether a gene is associated with CRC susceptibility and to promote clinical translation.

31815095
Germline mutations in Thai patients with nonmucinous epithelial ovarian cancer
Background:
        
      
      Genetic testing is widely recommended for all epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients. However, an increased probability of identifying germline mutations has been reported in selected patients with risk factors such as a family history or personal history of cancer and high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) subtype. HGSC has been reported to be the most common subtype of EOC worldwide (approximately 70%). However, this subtype is less prevalent in Thai patients (reported as only 20%). The difference in the distribution of various subtypes of EOC may reflect the incidence of germline mutations in Thai EOC patients.

28687356
Germline mutations in DNA repair genes predispose asbestos-exposed patients to malignant pleural mesothelioma
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare, aggressive cancer caused by asbestos exposure. An inherited predisposition has been suggested to explain multiple cases in the same family and the observation that not all individuals highly exposed to asbestos develop the tumor. Germline mutations in BAP1 are responsible for a rare cancer predisposition syndrome that includes predisposition to mesothelioma. We hypothesized that other genes involved in hereditary cancer syndromes could be responsible for the inherited mesothelioma predisposition. We investigated the prevalence of germline variants in 94 cancer-predisposing genes in 93 MPM patients with a quantified asbestos exposure. Ten pathogenic truncating variants (PTVs) were identified in PALB2, BRCA1, FANCI, ATM, SLX4, BRCA2, FANCC, FANCF, PMS1 and XPC. All these genes are involved in DNA repair pathways, mostly in homologous recombination repair. Patients carrying PTVs represented 9.7% of the panel and showed lower asbestos exposure than did all the other patients (p = 0.0015). This suggests that they did not efficiently repair the DNA damage induced by asbestos and leading to carcinogenesis. This study shows that germline variants in several genes may increase MPM susceptibility in the presence of asbestos exposure and may be important for specific treatment.

18504682
Different clinical and immunological presentation of ataxia-telangiectasia within the same family
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare multisystem neurodegenerative genetic disorder due to mutation of ATM gene. The clinical expression and the immunological abnormalities are variable and apparently not associated with the type of ATM mutations. We report on two siblings affected by A-T with different clinical and immunological presentations; in particular in one the immunological phenotype was reminiscent of hyper IgM syndrome.

25572163
Novel ATM mutation in a German patient presenting as generalized dystonia without classical signs of ataxia-telangiectasia


31920950
Single Molecule Molecular Inversion Probes for High Throughput Germline Screenings in Dystonia
Background: This study's aim was to investigate a large cohort of dystonia patients for pathogenic and rare variants in the ATM gene, making use of a new, cost-efficient enrichment technology for NGS-based screening. Methods: Single molecule Molecular Inversion Probes (smMIPs) were used for targeted enrichment and sequencing of all protein coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the ATM gene in 373 dystonia patients and six positive controls with known ATM variants. Additionally, a rare-variant association study was performed. Results: One patient (0.3%) was compound heterozygous and 21 others were carriers of variants of unknown significance (VUS) in the ATM gene. Although mutations in sporadic dystonia patients are not common, exclusion of pathogenic variants is crucial to recognize a potential tumor predisposition syndrome. SmMIPs produced similar results as routinely used NGS-based approaches. Conclusion: Our results underline the importance of implementing ATM in the routine genetic testing of dystonia patients and confirm the reliability of smMIPs and their usability for germline screenings in rare neurodegenerative conditions.

30426508
The identification of pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 negative, high risk, hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer patients: High frequency of FANCM pathogenic variants
NGS-based multiple gene panel resequencing in combination with a high resolution CGH-array was used to identify genetic risk factors for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer in 237 high risk patients who were previously tested negative for pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants. All patients were screened for pathogenic variants in 94 different cancer predisposing genes. We identified 32 pathogenic variants in 14 different genes (ATM, BLM, BRCA1, CDH1, CHEK2, FANCG, FANCM, FH, HRAS, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN, RAD51C and NBN) in 30 patients (12.7%). Two pathogenic BRCA1 variants that were previously undetected due to less comprehensive and sensitive methods were found. Five pathogenic variants are novel, three of which occur in genes yet unrelated to hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (FANCG, FH and HRAS). In our cohort we discovered a remarkably high frequency of truncating variants in FANCM (2.1%), which has recently been suggested as a susceptibility gene for hereditary breast cancer. Two patients of our cohort carried two different pathogenic variants each and 10 other patients in whom a pathogenic variant was confirmed also harbored a variant of unknown significance in a breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene. We were able to identify pathogenic variants predisposing for tumor formation in 12.3% of BRCA1/2 negative breast and/or ovarian cancer patients.

29271107
Optimizing the identification of risk-relevant mutations by multigene panel testing in selected hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families
The introduction of multigene panel testing for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer screening has greatly improved efficiency, speed, and costs. However, its clinical utility is still debated, mostly due to the lack of conclusive evidences on the impact of newly discovered genetic variants on cancer risk and lack of evidence-based guidelines for the clinical management of their carriers. In this pilot study, we aimed to test whether a systematic and multiparametric characterization of newly discovered mutations could enhance the clinical utility of multigene panel sequencing. Out of a pool of 367 breast/ovarian cancer families Sanger-sequenced for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations, we selected a cohort of 20 BRCA1/2-negative families to be subjected to the BROCA-Cancer Risk Panel massive parallel sequencing. As a strategy for the systematic characterization of newly discovered genetic variants, we collected blood and cancer tissue samples and established lymphoblastoid cell lines from all available individuals in these families, to perform segregation analysis, loss-of-heterozygosity and further molecular studies. We identified loss-of-function mutations in 6 out 20 high-risk families, 5 of which occurred on BRCA1, CHEK2 and ATM and are esteemed to be risk-relevant. In contrast, a novel RAD50 truncating mutation is most likely unrelated to breast cancer. Our data suggest that integrating multigene panel testing with a pre-organized, multiparametric characterization of newly discovered genetic variants improves the identification of risk-relevant alleles impacting on the clinical management of their carriers.

26915675
Unbiased targeted next-generation sequencing molecular approach for primary immunodeficiency diseases
Background:
        
      
      Molecular genetics techniques are an essential diagnostic tool for primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs). The use of next-generation sequencing (NGS) provides a comprehensive way of concurrently screening a large number of PID genes. However, its validity and cost-effectiveness require verification.

33510405
Germline variants drive myelodysplastic syndrome in young adults


31514334
Multigene Panel Testing Increases the Number of Loci Associated with Gastric Cancer Predisposition
The main gene involved in gastric cancer (GC) predisposition is CDH1, the pathogenic variants of which are associated with diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) and lobular breast cancer (LBC). CDH1 only explains a fraction (10-50%) of patients suspected of DGC/LBC genetic predisposition. To identify novel susceptibility genes, thus improving the management of families at risk, we performed a multigene panel testing on selected patients. We searched for germline pathogenic variants in 94 cancer-related genes in 96 GC or LBC Italian patients with early-onset and/or family history of GC. We found CDH1 pathogenic variants in 10.4% of patients. In 11.5% of cases, we identified loss-of-function variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and ATM breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility genes, as well as in MSH2, PMS2, BMPR1A, PRF1, and BLM genes. In 78.1% of patients, we did not find any variants with clear-cut clinical significance; however, 37.3% of these cases harbored rare missense variants predicted to be damaging by bioinformatics tools. Multigene panel testing decreased the number of patients that would have otherwise remained genetically unexplained. Besides CDH1, our results demonstrated that GC pathogenic variants are distributed across a number of susceptibility genes and reinforced the emerging link between gastric and breast cancer predisposition.

28488180
A new ataxia-telangiectasia mutation in an 11-year-old female
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a rare inherited disorder, usually affects the nervous and immune systems, and occasionally other organs. A-T is associated mainly with mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, which encodes a protein kinase that has a major role in the cellular response to DNA damage. We report here a novel ATM mutation (c.3244_3245insG; p.His1082fs) in an 11-year old female. This subject presented with typical features, with the addition of chest manifestations including mediastinal lymphadenopathy and diffuse bilateral micronodular infiltration of the lungs, along with a high EBV titer. The subject died as a result of rapid B-cell lymphoma progression before chemotherapy could be initiated. This case highlights the need for the rapid diagnosis of A-T mutations and the detection of associated life-threatening outcomes such as cancers.

10492163
Enhanced radiation late effects and cellular radiation sensitivity in an ATM heterozygous breast cancer patient
We observed severe late effects in a patient treated with radiation therapy for breast cancer. Radiation survival studies of patient fibroblasts show an enhanced cellular radiation sensitivity (Do = 0.95 Gy). Genetic analysis reveals that the patient is heterozygous for a mutated ATM gene. Protein truncation test (PTT) and sequence analysis identified a truncation within the leucine zipper domain, corresponding to a fragment previously reported to exhibit dominant negative function. These findings demonstrate that ATM heterozygosity may be associated with enhanced clinical radiation sensitivity and suggest a clinical relevance to this truncation that results in a dominant negative-acting protein.

30402232
Ataxia-telangiectasia with a novel ATM gene mutation and Burkitt leukemia: A case report
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an infrequent autosomal recessive disorder that involves multiple systems and is characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, radiosensitivity, immune deficiency with recurrent respiratory infections, and a tendency to develop lymphoid malignancies. A-T is caused by mutations in the ATM gene, with >1,000 mutations reported to date and gradually increasing in number. Patients with A-T have an increased incidence of cancers. The aim of the present study was to retrospectively review the case of a patient who presented at the age of 5 years with cerebellar ataxia without telangiectasia, and was diagnosed with Burkitt leukemia by bone marrow biopsy and molecular testing at the age of 7 years at the Xiangya Hospital of Central South University (Changsha, China). The patient received chemotherapy with the pediatric CCCG-BNHL-2015 regimen (R4 group) and achieved a complete remission after 2 courses. However, recurrent respiratory infections and thrombosis occurred during chemotherapy. The diagnosis of A-T was confirmed by uncovering two variants of the ATM gene, including c.742C>T (p.R248X; rs730881336) in exon 7 and c.6067-c.6068 ins GAGGGAAGAT in exon 41 by whole-exome sequencing. Unfortunately, the patient's parents refused follow-up treatment and he succumbed to recurrent severe infections 4 months after the diagnosis of Burkitt leukemia. The diagnosis of A-T may be challenging, as its phenotype can be incomplete early in the course of the disease. Detailed medical history, characteristic clinical manifestations and increasingly developed exome sequencing techniques may be helpful in diagnosing this rare disease. Management should be based on multidisciplinary guidance and other treatment options must be investigated in the future.

23585368
Exome resequencing identifies potential tumor-suppressor genes that predispose to colorectal cancer
Inherited factors account for around one third of all colorectal cancers (CRCs) and include rare high penetrance mutations in APC, MSH2, MSH6, and POLE. Here, we sought novel tumor-suppressor genes that predispose to CRC by exome resequencing 50 sporadic patients with advanced CRC (18 diagnosed ≤35 years of age) at a mean coverage of 30×. To help identify potentially pathogenic alleles, we initially sought rare or novel germline truncating mutations in 1,138 genes that were likely to play a role in colorectal tumorigenesis. In total, 32 such mutations were identified and confirmed, and included an insertion in APC and a deletion in POLE, thereby validating our approach for identifying disease alleles. We sought somatic mutations in the corresponding genes in the CRCs of the patients harboring the germline lesions and found biallelic inactivation of FANCM, LAMB4, PTCHD3, LAMC3, and TREX2, potentially implicating these genes as tumor suppressors. We also identified a patient who carried a germline truncating mutation in NOTCH3, part of the Notch signaling cascade that maintains intestinal homeostasis. Our whole exome analyses provided further gene lists to facilitate the identification of potential predisposition alleles.

20151403
Massively parallel sequencing of ataxia genes after array-based enrichment
Massively parallel sequencing has tremendous diagnostic potential but requires enriched templates for sequencing. Here we report the validation of an array-based sequence capture method in genetically heterogeneous disorders. The model disorder selected was AR ataxia, using five subjects with known mutations and two unaffected controls. The genomic sequences of seven disease genes, together with two control loci were targeted on a 2-Mb sequence-capture array. After enrichment, the patients' DNA samples were analyzed using one-quarter Roche GS FLX Titanium sequencing run, resulting in an average of 65 Mb of sequence data per patient. This was sufficient for an average 25-fold coverage/base in all targeted regions. Enrichment showed high specificity; on average, 80% of uniquely mapped reads were on target. Importantly, this approach enabled automated detection of deletions and hetero- and homozygous point mutations for 6/7 mutant alleles, and greater than 99% accuracy for known SNP variants. Our results also clearly show reduced coverage for sequences in repeat-rich regions, which significantly impacts the reliable detection of genomic variants. Based on these findings we recommend a minimal coverage of 15-fold for diagnostic implementation of this technology. We conclude that massive parallel sequencing of enriched samples enables personalized diagnosis of heterogeneous genetic disorders and qualifies for rapid diagnostic implementation.

28726808
Prevalence of germ-line mutations in cancer genes among pancreatic cancer patients with a positive family history
PurposePanel-based genetic testing has identified increasing numbers of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) who carry germ-line mutations. However, small sample sizes or number of genes evaluated limit prevalence estimates of these mutations. We estimated prevalence of mutations in PDAC patients with positive family history.MethodsWe sequenced 25 cancer susceptibility genes in lymphocyte DNA from 302 PDAC patients in the Mayo Clinic Biospecimen Resource for Pancreatic Research Registry. Kindreds containing at least two first-degree relatives with PDAC met criteria for familial pancreatic cancer (FPC), while the remaining were familial, but not FPC.ResultsThirty-six patients (12%) carried at least one deleterious mutation in one of 11 genes. Of FPC patients, 25/185 (14%) were carriers, while 11/117 (9%) non-FPC patients with family history were carriers. Deleterious mutations (n) identified in PDAC patients were BRCA2 (11), ATM (8), CDKN2A (4), CHEK2 (4), MUTYH/MYH (3 heterozygotes, not biallelic), BRCA1 (2), and 1 each in BARD1, MSH2, NBN, PALB2, and PMS2. Novel mutations were found in ATM, BARD1, and PMS2.ConclusionMultiple susceptibility gene testing in PDAC patients with family history of pancreatic cancer is warranted regardless of FPC status and will inform genetic risk counseling for families.

33294277
Molecular screening and clinicopathologic characteristics of Lynch-like syndrome in a Chinese colorectal cancer cohort
Colorectal cancers (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) or mismatch repair-deficiency (dMMR), but without detectable MMR germline mutations are termed Lynch-like syndrome (LLS). We assess the clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of LLS tumors and the proportion in LLS, which remain poorly investigated in China. We enrolled 404 CRC patients with surgery in our institution from 2014 to 2018. LLS tumors were detected by a molecular stratification based on MMR protein expression, MLH1 methylation and MMR gene mutation. LLS tumors were profiled for germline mutations in 425 cancer-relevant genes. Among 42 MMR-deficient tumors, 7 (16.7%) were attributable to MLH1 methylation and 7 (16.7%) to germline mutations, leaving 28 LLS cases (66.6%). LLS tumors were diagnosed at a mean age of 60.7 years, had an almost equivalent ratio among rectum, left colon and right colon, and had high rates of lymph node metastases (50%, 4/28 N2). Most MMR gene mutations (88.2%, 15/17) in LLS tumors were variants of unknown significance (VUS). Two novel frameshift mutations were detected in ATM and ARID1A, which are emerging as candidate responsible genes for LLS. In this study, 28 (66.6%) MMRd tumors were classified as LLS, which were significantly higher than reports of western countries. LLS tumors were more likely to carry lymph node metastases. However, it's hard to differentiated LLS tumors from LS through family history, tumor location, histological type of tumors, immunohistochemistry (IHC) for MMR proteins and MSI analysis.

27873105
Newborn Screening for Severe Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases in Sweden-a 2-Year Pilot TREC and KREC Screening Study
Newborn screening for severe primary immunodeficiencies (PID), characterized by T and/or B cell lymphopenia, was carried out in a pilot program in the Stockholm County, Sweden, over a 2-year period, encompassing 58,834 children. T cell receptor excision circles (TREC) and kappa-deleting recombination excision circles (KREC) were measured simultaneously using a quantitative PCR-based method on DNA extracted from dried blood spots (DBS), with beta-actin serving as a quality control for DNA quantity. Diagnostic cutoff levels enabling identification of newborns with milder and reversible T and/or B cell lymphopenia were also evaluated. Sixty-four children were recalled for follow-up due to low TREC and/or KREC levels, and three patients with immunodeficiency (Artemis-SCID, ATM, and an as yet unclassified T cell lymphopenia/hypogammaglobulinemia) were identified. Of the positive samples, 24 were associated with prematurity. Thirteen children born to mothers treated with immunosuppressive agents during pregnancy (azathioprine (n = 9), mercaptopurine (n = 1), azathioprine and tacrolimus (n = 3)) showed low KREC levels at birth, which spontaneously normalized. Twenty-nine newborns had no apparent cause identified for their abnormal results, but normalized with time. Children with trisomy 21 (n = 43) showed a lower median number of both TREC (104 vs. 174 copies/μL blood) and KREC (45 vs. 100 copies/3.2 mm blood spot), but only one, born prematurely, fell below the cutoff level. Two children diagnosed with DiGeorge syndrome were found to have low TREC levels, but these were still above the cutoff level. This is the first large-scale screening study with a simultaneous detection of both TREC and KREC, allowing identification of newborns with both T and B cell defects.

10571946
High incidence of cancer in a family segregating a mutation of the ATM gene: possible role of ATM heterozygosity in cancer
ATM mutations predispose cells to malignancy by promoting chromosomal instability. We have identified a family with multiple cancers that segregates a mutant allele of ATM, IVS61+2insTA, which causes skipping of exon 61 in the mRNA, as well as a previously undescribed polymorphism, IVS61+104C(54):T(46). The mutation was inherited by two sisters, one who developed breast cancer at age 39 and the second at age 44, from their mother, who developed kidney cancer at age 67. Molecular studies were undertaken to determine the role of the ATM gene in the development of cancer in this family. Studies of irradiated lymphocytes from both sisters revealed elevated numbers of chromatid breaks, typical of A-T heterozygotes. Studies on lymphoblastoid cell lines established from these individuals revealed abnormal p53 induction and apoptosis after DNA damage. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the ATM region of chromosome 11q23.1 showed that the normal ATM allele was lost in the breast tumor of the older sister. LOH was not seen at the BRCA1 or BRCA2 loci. BRCA2 is not likely to be a cancer-predisposing gene in this family because each sister inherited different chromosomes 13 from each parent. The sisters share their maternal BRCA1 allele, although no mutation in this gene was detected in the family. Our findings suggest that haploinsufficiency at ATM may promote tumorigenesis, even though LOH at the locus supports a more classic two-hit tumor suppressor gene model.

33077847
Pathogenic germline variants are associated with poor survival in stage III/IV melanoma patients
Patients with late stage resected cutaneous melanoma have poor overall survival (OS) and experience irreversible adverse events from systemic therapy. There is a clinical need to identify biomarkers to predict outcome. Performing germline/tumour whole-exome sequencing of 44 stage III/IV melanoma patients we identified pathogenic germline mutations in CDKN2A, CDK4, ATM, POLH, MRE11A, RECQL4 and XPC, affecting 7/44 patients. These mutations were associated with poor OS (p = 0.0082). We confirmed our findings in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) human skin cutaneous melanoma cohort where we identified pathogenic variants in 40/455 patients (p = 0.0203). Combining these cohorts (n = 499) further strengthened these findings showing germline carriers had worse OS (p = 0.0009). Additionally, we determined whether tumour mutation burden (TMB) or BRAF status were prognostic markers of survival. Low TMB rate (< 20 Mut/Mb; p = 0.0034) and BRAF p.V600 mutation (p = 0.0355) were associated with worse progression-free survival. Combining these biomarkers indicated that V600 mutant patients had significantly lower TMB (p = 0.0155). This was confirmed in the TCGA (n = 443, p = 0.0007). Integrative analysis showed germline mutation status conferred the highest risk (HR 5.2, 95% CI 1.72-15.7). Stage IV (HR 2.5, 0.74-8.6) and low TMB (HR 2.3, 0.57-9.4) were similar, whereas BRAF V600 status was the weakest prognostic biomarker (HR 1.5, 95% CI 0.44-5.2).

9521587
A double missense mutation in the ATM gene of a Dutch family with ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, elevated alpha-fetoprotein levels, chromosomal instability, predisposition to cancer, and radiation sensitivity. We report the identification of a new, double missense mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia gene (ATM) of a Dutch family. This homozygous mutation consists of two consecutive base substitutions in exon 55: a T-->G transversion at position 7875 of the ATM cDNA and a G-->C transversion at position 7876. These transversions were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction/primer-induced restriction analysis with CelII. The double base substitution results in an amino acid change of an aspartic acid to a glutamic acid at codon 2625 and of an alanine to a proline at codon 2626 of the ATM protein. Both amino acids are conserved between the ATM protein and its functional homolog, the Atm gene product in the mouse. Furthermore, the Chou-Fasman and Robson predictions both demonstrate a change in the secondary structure of the ATM protein carrying the D2625E/A2626P mutation. These findings suggest that the double base substitution in the ATM gene is a disease-causing mutation.

17600866
Rapid molecular prenatal diagnosis of ataxia-telangiectasia by direct mutational analysis
Mutations of the ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). This study reports the first A-T prenatal diagnosis performed in Spain by direct molecular analysis. The pregnant woman had a previous child suffering from A-T due to a deletion in the ATM gene. The ATM coding region was sequenced in the A-T patient and her parents. Then, a specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect the deletion was performed for prenatal diagnosis. Additionally, polymorphic HLA loci were examined in order to exclude the possible contamination by maternal DNA. In this family of Gypsy origin, we carried out a rapid molecular diagnosis of A-T. Then, a prenatal diagnosis was carried out, identifying the deletion in the fetal DNA. Additionally, we performed a population study in unrelated Spanish Gypsies and in unrelated controls, showing that the deletion described could be a hotspot in the Spanish Gypsy population. The size of the coding region and the genomic structure, together with the absence of hotspots, make the mutation screening of the ATM gene difficult. The ability to identify ATM mutations provides a tool that can be applied in confirmatory diagnosis, genetic counselling, carrier prediction and prenatal diagnosis.

31257506
Novel homozygous ataxia‑telangiectasia (A‑T) mutated gene mutation identified in a Chinese pedigree with A‑T
Ataxia‑telangiectasia (A‑T) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder mainly caused by mutations in the A‑T mutated (ATM) gene. However, the genomic abnormalities and their consequences associated with the pathogenesis of A‑T syndrome remain to be fully elucidated. In the present study, a whole‑exome sequencing analysis of a family with A‑T syndrome was performed, revealing a novel homozygous deletion mutation [namely, NM_000051.3:c.50_72+7del,p.Asp18_Lys24delins(23)] in ATM in three affected siblings, which was inherited from their carrier parents who exhibited a normal phenotype in this pedigree. The identified mutation spans the exon 2 and intron 2 regions of the ATM gene, causing a splicing aberration that resulted in a 30‑bp deletion in exon 2 and intron 2, as well as a 71‑bp insertion in intron 2 in the splicing process, which was confirmed by reverse transcription‑polymerase chain reaction and sequencing analysis. The change in the three‑dimensional structure of the protein caused by the mutation in ATM may affect the functions associated with telomere length maintenance and DNA damage repair. Taken together, the present study reported a novel homozygous deletion mutation in the ATM gene resulting in A‑T syndrome in a Chinese pedigree and expanded on the spectrum of known causative mutations of the ATM gene.

31671381
ATM whole gene deletion in an Italian family with hereditary pancreatic cancer: Challenges to cancer risk prediction associated with an 11q22.3 microdeletion
Hereditary pancreatic cancer has been attributed to variants of several cancer predisposition genes including ATM. While heterozygous pathogenic variants in the ATM gene are implicated as a cause of familial breast and pancreatic cancers to our knowledge ATM whole gene deletions have not been previously reported. We describe a contiguous gene deletion of the ATM locus in a multi-generation family of Italian descent with a strong family history of pancreatic cancer. A deletion of one copy of the entire ATM gene was identified by routine panel testing and further characterized by chromosomal microarray analysis. An 11q22.3 microdeletion of approximately 960 kb was identified that is predicted to result in loss of 10 genes including ATM. The deletion was identified in two additional family members including a presymptomatic daughter and an affected sibling. A normal disomic complement of the 11q22.3 region was detected in a third family member with a history of prostate and pancreatic cancer. Additional family members were not available for testing. Given available evidence that ATM haploinsufficiency can increase cancer risk, we predict that the observed copy number loss has likely contributed to hereditary cancer in this family. However, absence of the familial microdeletion in at least one affected family member suggests that ATM deletions are unlikely the sole contributing factor influencing tumor development in affected individuals. This case highlights 11q22.3 microdeletions of the ATM gene region as a possible risk factor for hereditary cancer, including pancreatic cancer. The same case provides a further cautionary tale for over interpretation of cancer risk associated tumor suppressor microdeletions and suggests that the variant may not be sufficient for tumor development or may modify the cancer risks associated with other, yet unidentified hereditary cancer genes.

33621668
Intronic Breakpoint Signatures Enhance Detection and Characterization of Clinically Relevant Germline Structural Variants
The relevance of large copy number variants (CNVs) to hereditary disorders has been long recognized, and population sequencing efforts have chronicled many common structural variants (SVs). However, limited data are available on the clinical contribution of rare germline SVs. Here, a detailed characterization of SVs identified using targeted next-generation sequencing was performed. Across 50 genes associated with hereditary cancer and cardiovascular disorders, a minimum of 828 unique SVs were reported, including 584 fully characterized SVs. Almost 40% of CNVs were <5 kb, with one in three deletions impacting a single exon. Additionally, 36 mid-range deletions/duplications (50 to 250 bp), 21 mobile element insertions, 6 inversions, and 27 complex rearrangements were detected. This data set was used to model SV detection in a bioinformatics pipeline solely relying on read depth, which revealed that genome sequencing (30×) allows detection of 71%, a 500× panel only targeting coding regions 53%, and exome sequencing (100×) <20% of characterized SVs. SVs accounted for 14.1% of all unique pathogenic variants, supporting the importance of SVs in hereditary disorders. Robust SV detection requires an ensemble of variant-calling algorithms that utilize sequencing of intronic regions. These algorithms should use distinct data features representative of each class of mutational mechanism, including recombination between two sequences sharing high similarity, covariants inserted between CNV breakpoints, and complex rearrangements containing inverted sequences.

32206661
Germline PALB2, ATM variants in a patient with breast and ovarian cancer at risk for familial cancer syndrome: Is there a role for risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy?
A 50-year-old non-Hispanic white Caucasian female was diagnosed with breast cancer and was subsequently found to possess the tumorigenic ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and PALB2 variants but not the BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants. She visited the gynecologic oncology office for routine counseling about risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO). Although the patient was asymptomatic, an adnexal mass was discovered in the physical examination performed by palpation. Upon using pre-operative imaging techniques, an 8 cm complex adnexal mass was identified. Her CA-125 level was elevated. She underwent complete cytoreductive surgery. Pathological analysis showed a stage IC clear cell carcinoma of the left ovary; subsequently, she received 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with a combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel. The patient exhibited no signs ovarian cancer in a follow-up appointment after 32 months of treatment. However, bilateral RRSO is not recommended for patients positive for ATM and PALB2. Breast cancer patients with PALB2 and ATM mutations should extensively discuss the risks and benefits of RRSO in light of current data.

33671809
A Novel ATM Pathogenic Variant in an Italian Woman with Gallbladder Cancer
Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) is one of the most aggressive malignancies with poor prognosis and a high fatality rate. The disease presents in advanced stages where the treatment is ineffective. Regarding GBC pathogenesis, as with other neoplasia, this tumor is a multifactorial disorder involving different causative factors such as environmental, microbial, metabolic, and molecular. Genetic alterations can be germline or somatic that involving proto-oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, cell cycle genes, and growth factors. The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, coding a serine/threonine kinase involved in the early stages of the homologous recombination (HR) mechanism, is one of the most altered genes in GBC. Here, we present the molecular characterization of a novel germline ATM large genomic rearrangement (LGR) identified by next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis in an Italian woman diagnosed with metastatic GBC at the age of 55. The results underline the importance of expanding the NGS approach in gallbladder cancer in order to propose new molecular markers of predisposition and prognosis exploitable by novel targeted therapies that may improve the response of patients with ATM-deficient cancers.

12149412
Pregnancy after preimplantation genetic diagnosis for Ataxia Telangiectasia
Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder with an incidence estimated at 1 in 40 000 to 1 in 100 000 live births. More than 100 different somatic and germ-line mutations have been identified in the AT gene, the majority of which cause premature protein truncation. The immense size of the AT gene (66 exons) complicates the detection of mutations. A Saudi family with three affected children suffering from AT consulted our IVF centre for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). Despite advanced maternal age and unknown mutation, the family was screened for AT mutations. A large deletion in the gene was found to be responsible for the phenotype of AT. The mutation detection permitted us to perform PGD on AT for the first time. Single cell PCR consisted of amplifying one of the deleted exons, exon 19. Homozygous affected embryos show an absence of the exon, while in heterozygous or normal embryos the exon is amplified successfully. After ICSI, three embryos were suitable for embryo biopsy. After biopsy only one embryo showed exon amplification and was transferred. A singleton pregnancy ensued and prenatal diagnosis confirmed the presence of exon 19. This report demonstrates that PGD is feasible despite advanced maternal age and poor response to follicle stimulation.

33494414
Characterization of New ATM Deletion Associated with Hereditary Breast Cancer
Next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based cancer risk screening with multigene panels has become the most successful method for programming cancer prevention strategies. ATM germ-line heterozygosity has been described to increase tumor susceptibility. In particular, families carrying heterozygous germ-line variants of ATM gene have a 5- to 9-fold risk of developing breast cancer. Recent studies identified ATM as the second most mutated gene after CHEK2 in BRCA-negative patients. Nowadays, more than 170 missense variants and several truncating mutations have been identified in ATM gene. Here, we present the molecular characterization of a new ATM deletion, identified thanks to the CNV algorithm implemented in the NGS analysis pipeline. An automated workflow implementing the SOPHiA Genetics' Hereditary Cancer Solution (HCS) protocol was used to generate NGS libraries that were sequenced on Illumina MiSeq Platform. NGS data analysis allowed us to identify a new inactivating deletion of exons 19-27 of ATM gene. The deletion was characterized both at the DNA and RNA level.

28351596
Brain edema with clasmatodendrosis complicating ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a chronic progressive disorder affecting the nervous and immune systems, caused by a genetic defect in the ATM protein. Clasmatodendrosis, a distinct form of astroglial death, has rarely been reported in ataxia-telangiectasia. Neuropathology of our patient disclosed diffuse edema of the cerebral and cerebellar white matter with prominent clasmatodendrosis, implicating ATM in the regulation of astroglial cell death.

31669783
Generation of induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (UNIBSi008-A, UNIBSi008-B, UNIBSi008-C) from an Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) patient carrying a novel homozygous deletion in ATM gene
Using a Sendai Virus based vector delivering Yamanaka Factors, we generated induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of a patient affected by Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT), caused by a novel homozygous deletion in ATM, spanning exons 5-7. Three clones were fully characterized for pluripotency and capability to differentiate. These clones preserved the causative mutation of parental cells and genomic stability over time (>100 passages). Furthermore, in AT derived iPSCs we confirmed the impaired DNA damage response after ionizing radiation. All these data underline potential usefulness of our clones as in vitro AT disease model.

33047316
Feedback of extended panel sequencing in 1530 patients referred for suspicion of hereditary predisposition to adult cancers
High-throughput sequencing analysis represented both a medical diagnosis and technological revolution. Gene panel analysis is now routinely performed in the exploration of hereditary predisposition to cancer, which is becoming increasingly heterogeneous, both clinically and molecularly. We present 1530 patients with suspicion of hereditary predisposition to cancer, for which two types of analyses were performed: a) oriented according to the clinical presentation (n = 417), or b) extended to genes involved in hereditary predisposition to adult cancer (n = 1113). Extended panel analysis had a higher detection rate compared to oriented analysis in hereditary predisposition to breast / ovarian cancer (P < .001) and in digestive cancers (P < .094) (respectively 15% vs 5% and 19.3%, vs 12.5%). This higher detection is explained by the inclusion of moderate penetrance genes, as well as the identification of incident mutations and double mutations. Our study underscores the utility of proposing extended gene panel analysis to patients with suspicion of hereditary predisposition to adult cancer.

30086788
Breast cancer patients suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutational spectrum, candidate genes, and unexplained heredity
Background:
        
      
      Breast cancer is the most prevalent tumor entity in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Up to 80% of individuals with a Li-Fraumeni-like phenotype do not harbor detectable causative germline TP53 variants. Yet, no systematic panel analyses for a wide range of cancer predisposition genes have been conducted on cohorts of women with breast cancer fulfilling Li-Fraumeni(-like) clinical diagnostic criteria.

23454770
p53 centrosomal localization diagnoses ataxia-telangiectasia homozygotes and heterozygotes
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by radiosensitivity, genomic instability, and predisposition to cancer. A-T is caused by biallelic mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, but heterozygous carriers, though apparently healthy, are believed to be at increased risk for cancer and more sensitive to ionizing radiation than the general population. Despite progress in functional and sequencing-based assays, no straightforward, rapid, and inexpensive test is available for the identification of A-T homozygotes and heterozygotes, which is essential for diagnosis, genetic counseling, and carrier prediction. The oncosuppressor p53 prevents genomic instability and centrosomal amplification. During mitosis, p53 localizes at the centrosome in an ATM-dependent manner. We capitalized on the latter finding and established a simple, fast, minimally invasive, reliable, and inexpensive test to determine mutant ATM zygosity. The percentage of mitotic lymphoblasts or PBMCs bearing p53 centrosomal localization clearly discriminated among healthy donors (>75%), A-T heterozygotes (40%-56%), and A-T homozygotes (<30%). The test is specific for A-T, independent of the type of ATM mutations, and recognized tumor-associated ATM polymorphisms. In a preliminary study, our test confirmed that ATM is a breast cancer susceptibility gene. These data open the possibility of cost-effective, early diagnosis of A-T homozygotes and large-scale screenings for heterozygotes.

30054569
DNA breakpoint assay reveals a majority of gross duplications occur in tandem reducing VUS classifications in breast cancer predisposition genes
Purpose:
        
      
      Gross duplications are ambiguous in terms of clinical interpretation due to the limitations of the detection methods that cannot infer their context, namely, whether they occur in tandem or are duplicated and inserted elsewhere in the genome. We investigated the proportion of gross duplications occurring in tandem in breast cancer predisposition genes with the intent of informing their classifications.

24105367
Mate pair sequencing for the detection of chromosomal aberrations in patients with intellectual disability and congenital malformations
Recently, microarrays have replaced karyotyping as a first tier test in patients with idiopathic intellectual disability and/or multiple congenital abnormalities (ID/MCA) in many laboratories. Although in about 14-18% of such patients, DNA copy-number variants (CNVs) with clinical significance can be detected, microarrays have the disadvantage of missing balanced rearrangements, as well as providing no information about the genomic architecture of structural variants (SVs) like duplications and complex rearrangements. Such information could possibly lead to a better interpretation of the clinical significance of the SV. In this study, the clinical use of mate pair next-generation sequencing was evaluated for the detection and further characterization of structural variants within the genomes of 50 ID/MCA patients. Thirty of these patients carried a chromosomal aberration that was previously detected by array CGH or karyotyping and suspected to be pathogenic. In the remaining 20 patients no causal SVs were found and only benign aberrations were detected by conventional techniques. Combined cluster and coverage analysis of the mate pair data allowed precise breakpoint detection and further refinement of previously identified balanced and (complex) unbalanced aberrations, pinpointing the causal gene for some patients. We conclude that mate pair sequencing is a powerful technology that can provide rapid and unequivocal characterization of unbalanced and balanced SVs in patient genomes and can be essential for the clinical interpretation of some SVs.

33144682
Impact of integrated translational research on clinical exome sequencing
Purpose:
        
      
      Exome sequencing often identifies pathogenic genetic variants in patients with undiagnosed diseases. Nevertheless, frequent findings of variants of uncertain significance necessitate additional efforts to establish causality before reaching a conclusive diagnosis. To provide comprehensive genomic testing to patients with undiagnosed disease, we established an Individualized Medicine Clinic, which offered clinical exome testing and included a Translational Omics Program (TOP) that provided variant curation, research activities, or research exome sequencing.

28592523
Germline CDKN2A/P16INK4A mutations contribute to genetic determinism of sarcoma
Background:
        
      
      Sarcomas are rare mesenchymal malignancies whose pathogenesis is poorly understood; both environmental and genetic risk factors could contribute to their aetiology.

20169295
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha gene mutations in vitiligo vulgaris
Vitiligo vulgaris is an acquired depigmenting disorder resulting from the loss of melanocytes in the skin. Though several putative susceptibility loci of vitiligo have been identified in different populations, the pathogenesis of the disease remains poorly understood. Through genetic linkage analysis of a large Chinese family cohort of vitiligo, we identified a vitiligo linkage locus AIS4 within chromosome 4q12-q21, a region containing several possible candidate genes, including the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) gene. We postulated that PDGFR mutations may be linked with vitiligo. To test this hypothesis, we performed DNA sequencing on this gene in 143 multiplex families with familial vitiligo vulgaris, 480 patients with sporadic vitiligo vulgaris, and 480 healthy subjects. Mutations were found in 3.5% of familial vitiligo cases, which is significantly higher than for the general population (0.42%, p = 0.008, Fisher's exact test), and possibly higher than in sporadic vitiligo patients (1.0%, p = 0.053). To our knowledge, this is the first observation that PDGFRA mutations are linked with familial vitiligo vulgaris.

29987844
Copy number variation analysis and targeted NGS in 77 families with suspected Lynch syndrome reveals novel potential causative genes
In many families with suspected Lynch syndrome (LS), no germline mutation in the causative mismatch repair (MMR) genes is detected during routine diagnostics. To identify novel causative genes for LS, the present study investigated 77 unrelated, mutation-negative patients with clinically suspected LS and a loss of MSH2 in tumor tissue. An analysis for genomic copy number variants (CNV) was performed, with subsequent next generation sequencing (NGS) of selected candidate genes in a subgroup of the cohort. Genomic DNA was genotyped using Illumina's HumanOmniExpress Bead Array. After quality control and filtering, 25 deletions and 16 duplications encompassing 73 genes were identified in 28 patients. No recurrent CNV was detected, and none of the CNVs affected the regulatory regions of MSH2. A total of 49 candidate genes from genomic regions implicated by the present CNV analysis and 30 known or assumed risk genes for colorectal cancer (CRC) were then sequenced in a subset of 38 patients using a customized NGS gene panel and Sanger sequencing. Single nucleotide variants were identified in 14 candidate genes from the CNV analysis. The most promising of these candidate genes were: (i) PRKCA, PRKDC, and MCM4, as a functional relation to MSH2 is predicted by network analysis, and (ii) CSMD1, as this is commonly mutated in CRC. Furthermore, six patients harbored POLE variants outside the exonuclease domain, suggesting that these might be implicated in hereditary CRC. Analyses in larger cohorts of suspected LS patients recruited via international collaborations are warranted to verify the present findings.

34347074
Germline Alterations in Patients With IBD-associated Colorectal Cancer
Background:
        
      
      Patients with inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), both ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), are at risk of developing a colorectal cancer (CRC). No information is available on the contribution of patients' genetic background to CRC occurrence. This study investigates germline alterations in patients with IBD-associated CRC.

22473090
PDGFRa mutations in humans with isolated cleft palate
Isolated cleft palate (CP) is common in humans and has complex genetic etiologies. Many genes have been found to contribute to CP, but the full spectrum of genes remains unknown. PCR-sequencing of the entire coding regions and the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRa) and the microRNA (miR), miR-140 identified seven novel single base-pair substitutions in the PDGFRa in 9/102 patients with CP (8.8%), compared with 5/500 ethnic-matched unaffected controls (1%) (the two-tailed P-value<0.0001). Of these seven, four were missense mutations in the coding regions and three in the 3'UTR. Frequencies of four changes (three in coding, one in 3'UTR) were statistically different from those of controls (P-value<0.05). The c.*34G>A was identified in 1/102 cases and 0/500 controls. This position is conserved in primates and located 10 bp away from a predicted binding site for the miR-140. Luciferase assay revealed that, in the presence of miR-140, the c.*34G>A significantly repressed luciferase activity compared with that of the wild type, suggesting functional significance of this variant. This is the first study providing evidence supporting a role of PDGFRa in human CP.

17087943
Intestinal neurofibromatosis is a subtype of familial GIST and results from a dominant activating mutation in PDGFRA
Background & aims:
        
      
      Intestinal neurofibromatosis (Online Mendelian inheritance in Man database number 162220) is an alternate form of neurofibromatosis. Patients present with neurofibromas limited to the intestine in the absence of any other typical features of NF1 and NF2. At present, the molecular basis of intestinal neurofibromatosis remains elusive. The aim of the present study was to find the gene responsible for intestinal neurofibromatosis and to characterize functionally the mutation.

17566086
Multiple gastrointestinal stromal and other tumors caused by platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha gene mutations: a case associated with a germline V561D defect
Context:
        
      
      Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) may be caused by somatic or germline mutations of the KIT and PDGFRA genes, but most GISTs associated with neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are not, suggesting that other molecular pathways are implicated in their pathogenesis.

18670346
Stromal, fibrous, and fatty gastrointestinal tumors in a patient with a PDGFRA gene mutation
We report the case of a woman with 3 different types of gastrointestinal tumors--stromal, fibrous, and fatty--and a germline defect of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) gene (V561D). The patient, now 52 years old, presented in 1977 at age 22 years with a gastric tumor and a duodenal lipoma. Subsequently, she developed obstructing small intestinal fibrous tumors that required 3 laparotomies and intestinal resections. Most recently (in 2002), more than 100 fibrous tumors were resected and also multiple small intestinal lipomas and multiple gastric KIT, PDGFRalpha, and CD34-positive stromal tumors. The nosology of the fibrous tumors was not clear. The lesions were hypocellular and featured poorly outlined spindle, stellate, and polygonal CD34 positive, and KIT- and PDGFRalpha-negative cells. They extended through the muscularis propria, expanded the subserosa, and occasionally extended into the mesentery but did not metastasize. The patient is currently asymptomatic; radiologic study in June 2007 revealed postoperative changes only. None of the patient's primary relatives have had similar tumors.

27701467
Germline Variants of Prostate Cancer in Japanese Families
Prostate cancer (PC) is the second most common cancer in men. Family history is the major risk factor for PC. Only two susceptibility genes were identified in PC, BRCA2 and HOXB13. A comprehensive search of germline variants for patients with PC has not been reported in Japanese families. In this study, we conducted exome sequencing followed by Sanger sequencing to explore responsible germline variants in 140 Japanese patients with PC from 66 families. In addition to known susceptibility genes, BRCA2 and HOXB13, we identified TRRAP variants in a mutually exclusive manner in seven large PC families (three or four patients per family). We also found shared variants of BRCA2, HOXB13, and TRRAP from 59 additional small PC families (two patients per family). We identified two deleterious HOXB13 variants (F127C and G132E). Further exploration of the shared variants in rest of the families revealed deleterious variants of the so-called cancer genes (ATP1A1, BRIP1, FANCA, FGFR3, FLT3, HOXD11, MUTYH, PDGFRA, SMARCA4, and TCF3). The germline variant profile provides a new insight to clarify the genetic etiology and heterogeneity of PC among Japanese men.

25975287
PDGFRA-mutant syndrome
Germline PDGFRA mutations cause multiple heterogeneous gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors. In its familial form this disease, which was formerly termed intestinal neurofibromatosis/neurofibromatosis 3b (INF/NF3b), has been included among familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) because of its genotype, described when GIST was the only known PDGFRA-mutant gastrointestinal tumor. Shortly afterwards, however, inflammatory fibroid polyps also revealed PDGFRA mutations. Subsequently, gastrointestinal CD34+ 'fibrous tumors' of uncertain classification were described in a germline PDGFRA-mutant context. Our aim was to characterize the syndrome produced by germline PDGFRA mutations and establish diagnostic criteria and management strategies for this hitherto puzzling disease. We studied a kindred displaying multiple gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors, comparing it with published families/individuals with possible analogous conditions. We identified a novel inherited PDGFRA mutation (P653L), constituting the third reported example of familial PDGFRA mutation. In adult mutants we detected inflammatory fibroid polyps, gastric GISTs and gastrointestinal fibrous tumors of uncertain nosology. We demonstrate that the syndrome formerly defined as INF/NF3b (exemplified by the family reported herein) is simplistically considered a form of familial GIST, because inflammatory fibroid polyps often prevail. Fibrous tumors appear variants of inflammatory fibroid polyps. 'INF/NF3b' and 'familial GIST' are misleading terms which we propose changing to 'PDGFRA-mutant syndrome'. In this condition, unlike KIT-dependent familial GIST syndromes, if present, GISTs are stomach-restricted and diffuse Cajal cell hyperplasia is not observed. This restriction of GISTs to the stomach in PDGFRA-mutant syndrome: (i) focuses oncological concern on gastric masses, as inflammatory fibroid polyps are benign; (ii) supports a selective role of gastric environment for PDGFRA mutations to elicit GISTs, justifying the known predilection for stomach of sporadic PDGFRA-mutant GISTs. An awareness that inflammatory fibroid polyps, relatively common among gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors, may be the prevailing tumor in PDGFRA-mutant syndrome could eventually reveal an unsuspected prevalence of this condition.

12660384
A tyrosine kinase created by fusion of the PDGFRA and FIP1L1 genes as a therapeutic target of imatinib in idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome involves a prolonged state of eosinophilia associated with organ dysfunction. It is of unknown cause. Recent reports of responses to imatinib in patients with the syndrome suggested that an activated kinase such as ABL, platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), or KIT, all of which are inhibited by imatinib, might be the cause.

14699510
PDGFRA germline mutation in a family with multiple cases of gastrointestinal stromal tumor
Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder associated with KIT germline mutations. In sporadic forms of the disease, somatic mutations target either KIT or PDGFRA genes. In a kindred in which 5 individuals had GIST, no germline mutation in KIT coding sequence has been detected. We hypothesized that the PDGFRA gene could be a predisposing gene in familial GIST. We sequenced PDGFRA exons 12 and 18 because several somatic mutations were identified within this region. We detected a germline PDGFRA missense mutation, 2675G > T, resulting in a tyrosine substitution for the highly conserved aspartic acid at codon 846. This mutation showed perfect cosegregation with the GIST phenotype among the 7 family members tested. Interestingly, PDGFRA Asp846 is homologous to codon 820, which is located in the KIT tyrosine kinase II domain. In a previous study, a KIT germline Asp820Tyr mutation was detected in a Japanese kindred in which 6 individuals had GIST. Transfection of a KIT820Tyr complementary DNA in nude mice was found to be tumorigenic confirming the oncogenic potential of this mutation. The present study shows that PDGFRA is a second familial GIST predisposing gene. These results indicate a further example of involvement of structurally related genes in familial cancer syndromes.

29486293
Familial PDGFRA-mutation syndrome: somatic and gastrointestinal phenotype
Germline activating platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) mutations have been described in four families. All the index patients have presented with multiple mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. We identified a fifth family with four first-degree relatives that harbor a PDGFRA exon 18 (D846V) germline mutation. The affected kindred have a unique phenotype including coarse facies and skin, broad hands and feet, and previously undescribed premature tooth loss. While the index patient presented with multiple small bowel inflammatory fibroid polyps (IFPs) and has a gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), no tumors have yet been identified in other family members. We describe the pathology, genetics, the incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity of the familial PDGFRA-mutation syndrome referencing the mouse knock-in Pdgfra model. We speculate on the role of the telocyte, a recently described CD34, PDGFRA+ stromal cell, in the development of inflammatory fibroid polyps and the somatic phenotype.

17568391
Candidate genes for congenital diaphragmatic hernia from animal models: sequencing of FOG2 and PDGFRalpha reveals rare variants in diaphragmatic hernia patients
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common, life threatening birth defect. Although there is strong evidence implicating genetic factors in its pathogenesis, few causative genes have been identified, and in isolated CDH, only one de novo, nonsense mutation has been reported in FOG2 in a female with posterior diaphragmatic eventration. We report here that the homozygous null mouse for the Pdgfralpha gene has posterolateral diaphragmatic defects and thus is a model for human CDH. We hypothesized that mutations in this gene could cause human CDH. We sequenced PDGFRalpha and FOG2 in 96 patients with CDH, of which 53 had isolated CDH (55.2%), 36 had CDH and additional anomalies (37.5%), and 7 had CDH and known chromosome aberrations (7.3%). For FOG2, we identified novel sequence alterations predicting p.M703L and p.T843A in two patients with isolated CDH that were absent in 526 and 564 control chromosomes respectively. These altered amino acids were highly conserved. However, due to the lack of available parental DNA samples we were not able to determine if the sequence alterations were de novo. For PDGFRalpha, we found a single variant predicting p.L967V in a patient with CDH and multiple anomalies that was absent in 768 control chromosomes. This patient also had one cell with trisomy 15 on skin fibroblast culture, a finding of uncertain significance. Although our study identified sequence variants in FOG2 and PDGFRalpha, we have not definitively established the variants as mutations and we found no evidence that CDH commonly results from mutations in these genes.

30290665
Targeted high-throughput sequencing technique for the molecular diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency disorders
The aim of this study was to investigate the usefulness of targeted high-throughput sequencing (HTS) for the molecular diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency diseases (PID).A total of 56 clinically diagnosed or suspected PID patients were divided into 4 groups according to the International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee for Primary Immunodeficiency 2015 and their chief clinical presentations. Patients and their biological family members were examined by targeted HTS, which sequenced the exons and ±10 bp flanking introns of 171 PID-related genes panel. All significant variants were confirmed by PCR-Sanger sequencing. Pathogenicity of the variants was evaluated by using bioinformatics.A total of 117 variants in 73 genes were found in 56 patients. Accurate molecular diagnosis of PID was made in 13 (23.2%) patients, and 12 novel mutations were detected in these patients. Twenty-seven patients carried heterozygous variants that are probably pathogenic in ≥2 genes; 16 patients had only 1 missense variant, or had several variants but not >1 variant was deleterious as evaluated by bioinformatics. The meaning of the targeted HTS results of these patients remains to be studied.Targeted HTS can make a precise molecular diagnosis of PID and detect more novel pathogenic mutations. More and more variations with ambiguous significance are discovered and explanation of these variations is a challenge to the clinicians.

32859249
Systems genetics analysis identifies calcium-signaling defects as novel cause of congenital heart disease
Background:
        
      
      Congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs in almost 1% of newborn children and is considered a multifactorial disorder. CHD may segregate in families due to significant contribution of genetic factors in the disease etiology. The aim of the study was to identify pathophysiological mechanisms in families segregating CHD.

33151324
Molecular Features and Functional Implications of Germline Variants in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer
Background:
        
      
      The germline variant spectrum of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is different from that of other subtypes and has demonstrated ethnic differences. However, the germline variants of TNBC among Chinese patients and its clinical significance remain unclear.

27884173
Revisiting the morbid genome of Mendelian disorders
Background:
        
      
      The pathogenicity of many Mendelian variants has been challenged by large-scale sequencing efforts. However, many rare and benign "disease mutations" are difficult to analyze due to their rarity. The Saudi Arabian variome is enriched for homozygosity due to inbreeding, a key advantage that can be exploited for the critical examination of previously published variants.

15635072
A PDGFRA promoter polymorphism, which disrupts the binding of ZNF148, is associated with primitive neuroectodermal tumours and ependymomas
Background:
        
      
      Platelet derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRalpha) expression is typical for a variety of brain tumours, while in normal adult brain PDGFRalpha expression is limited to a small number of neural progenitor cells. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the PDGFRalpha expression in tumours are not known, but in the absence of amplification, changes in transcriptional regulation might be an important factor in this process.

26884814
Copy number variations in 119 Chinese children with idiopathic short stature identified by the custom genome-wide microarray
Background:
        
      
      Idiopathic short stature (ISS) refers to short stature with no evident etiologies. The custom genome-wide microarray specifically designed to cover height-related genes may be helpful to detect copy number variations (CNVs) in ISS patients, which may be missed by the general microarray. The aim of the study was to validate the applicability of the custom microarray and to analyze CNVs in Chinese ISS children.

28398664
Rare copy number variants in patients with congenital conotruncal heart defects
Background:
        
      
      Previous studies using different cardiac phenotypes, technologies and designs suggest a burden of large, rare or de novo copy number variants (CNVs) in subjects with congenital heart defects. We sought to identify disease-related CNVs, candidate genes, and functional pathways in a large number of cases with conotruncal and related defects that carried no known genetic syndrome.

17056636
Expansion of the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum in patients with KRAS germline mutations
Background:
        
      
      Noonan syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) and Costello syndrome constitute a group of developmental disorders with an overlapping pattern of congenital anomalies. Each of these conditions can be caused by germline mutations in key components of the highly conserved Ras-MAPK pathway, possibly reflecting a similar pathogenesis underlying the three disorders. Germline mutations in KRAS have recently been identified in a small number of patients with Noonan syndrome and CFC.

20949621
Germline KRAS mutations cause aberrant biochemical and physical properties leading to developmental disorders
The KRAS gene is the most common locus for somatic gain-of-function mutations in human cancer. Germline KRAS mutations were shown recently to be associated with developmental disorders, including Noonan syndrome (NS), cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS), and Costello syndrome (CS). The molecular basis of this broad phenotypic variability has in part remained elusive so far. Here, we comprehensively analyzed the biochemical and structural features of ten germline KRAS mutations using physical and cellular biochemistry. According to their distinct biochemical and structural alterations, the mutants can be grouped into five distinct classes, four of which markedly differ from RAS oncoproteins. Investigated functional alterations comprise the enhancement of intrinsic and guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) catalyzed nucleotide exchange, which is alternatively accompanied by an impaired GTPase-activating protein (GAP) stimulated GTP hydrolysis, an overall loss of functional properties, and a deficiency in effector interaction. In conclusion, our data underscore the important role of RAS in the pathogenesis of the group of related disorders including NS, CFCS, and CS, and provide clues to the high phenotypic variability of patients with germline KRAS mutations.

17468812
Further evidence of genetic heterogeneity in Costello syndrome: involvement of the KRAS gene
Costello syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder comprising growth deficiency, mental retardation, curly hair, coarse facial features, nasal papillomata, low-set ears with large lobes, cardiac anomalies, redundant skin in palms and soles with prominent creases, dark skin, and propensity to certain solid tumors. HRAS mutations have been implicated in approximately 85% of the affected cases. The clinical overlap among Costello, Noonan, and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes is now better understood given their common molecular background, such that all these syndromes constitute a class of disorders caused by deregulated RAS-MAPK signaling. We report on a novel KRAS gene mutation in a patient presenting the clinical features typical of Costello syndrome and the additional findings seen in Noonan syndrome. This description emphasizes that a subset of patients with Costello syndrome could harbor mutations in other genes involved in the RAS-MAPK signaling.

22211815
Multiple, diffuse schwannomas in a RASopathy phenotype patient with germline KRAS mutation: a causal relationship?


24037001
Tegumentary manifestations of Noonan and Noonan-related syndromes
Objectives:
        
      
      Noonan and Noonan-related syndromes are common autosomal dominant disorders with neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous and developmental involvement. The objective of this article is to describe the most relevant tegumentary findings in a cohort of 41 patients with Noonan or Noonan-related syndromes and to detail certain aspects of the molecular mechanisms underlying ectodermal involvement.

18813118
Undifferentiated carcinoma with osteoclastic giant cells (UCOCGC) of the pancreas associated with the familial atypical multiple mole melanoma syndrome (FAMMM)
The familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome is caused by a germline mutation of p16. More than 90% of the sporadic pancreatic carcinomas contain genetic alterations that inactivate p16. Patients with the FAMMM syndrome have an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Ductal adenocarcinoma is the most common cancer of the pancreas and the one encountered in patients with FAMMM syndrome. Undifferentiated carcinoma with osteoclastic giant cells, also referred to as UCOCGC of the pancreas, is a rare variant of pancreatic cancer. An UCOCGC of the pancreas associated with FAMMM syndrome is described in this report. Molecular analysis confirmed a germline p16-Leiden deletion in the UCOCGC, accompanied by somatic loss of heterozygosity of the second p16 allele, and absence of p16 protein expression in the neoplastic cells. It is the first case reported and it provides additional evidence that UCOCGC can be considered as a variant of conventional ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.

23437064
Computational analysis of KRAS mutations: implications for different effects on the KRAS p.G12D and p.G13D mutations
Background:
        
      
      The issue of whether patients diagnosed with metastatic colorectal cancer who harbor KRAS codon 13 mutations could benefit from the addition of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy remains under debate. The aim of the current study was to perform computational analysis to investigate the structural implications of the underlying mutations caused by c.38G>A (p.G13D) on protein conformation.

26242988
The lymphatic phenotype in Noonan and Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
The RASopathies, which include Noonan syndrome (NS) and Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC), are autosomal dominant disorders with genetic heterogeneity associated with germline mutations of genes in the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK; RAS-MAP kinase) pathway. The conditions overlap and are characterised by facial dysmorphism, short stature and congenital heart disease. NS and CFC, in particular, are known to be associated with lymphatic problems, but this has not been well characterised to date. We describe 11 patients with Noonan or CFC syndrome with significant, persistent and progressive lymphatic dysplasia. The lymphatic disorders in Noonan and CFC syndrome are rare, but have a characteristic pattern with bilateral lower limb lymphoedema, genital swelling with chylous reflux and frequent systemic involvement, including intestinal lymphangiectasia and chylothoraces, which may be progressive. Lymphoscintigraphy demonstrates reflux and/or rerouting of lymphatic drainage associated with incompetent veins on the venous duplex scans.

22669205
Missense mutations in MLH1, MSH2, KRAS, and APC genes in colorectal cancer patients in Malaysia
Background:
        
      
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide with approximately 1 million cases diagnosed annually. In Malaysia, CRC is the second most common cancer in women and ranked first in men. The underlying cause of CRC remains unknown.

16474405
Germline KRAS mutations cause Noonan syndrome
Noonan syndrome (MIM 163950) is characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphism and cardiac defects. Heterozygous mutations in PTPN11, which encodes SHP-2, cause approximately 50% of cases of Noonan syndrome. The SHP-2 phosphatase relays signals from activated receptor complexes to downstream effectors, including Ras. We discovered de novo germline KRAS mutations that introduce V14I, T58I or D153V amino acid substitutions in five individuals with Noonan syndrome and a P34R alteration in a individual with cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (MIM 115150), which has overlapping features with Noonan syndrome. Recombinant V14I and T58I K-Ras proteins show defective intrinsic GTP hydrolysis and impaired responsiveness to GTPase activating proteins, render primary hematopoietic progenitors hypersensitive to growth factors and deregulate signal transduction in a cell lineage-specific manner. These studies establish germline KRAS mutations as a cause of human disease and infer that the constellation of developmental abnormalities seen in Noonan syndrome spectrum is, in large part, due to hyperactive Ras.

18958496
Noonan syndrome caused by germline KRAS mutation in Taiwan: report of two patients and a review of the literature
Noonan syndrome is a highly variable disorder that has significant phenotypic overlap with Costello syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. KRAS mutation was the second reported gene for Noonan syndrome. This study screened for mutation of the KRAS gene in 57 unrelated ethnic Chinese children suffering from Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 gene mutation in Taiwan. This work only identified two patients with different missense mutations (c.40G>A, p.Val14Ile; c.108A>G, p.Ile36Met) in the exon 1 of KRAS gene. This study also analyzed the characteristics of 34 reported cases involving KRAS mutations in the literature. All these patients presented with variable phenotypes, including Noonan syndrome (n = 19), cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (n = 7), Costello syndrome (n = 6), and Noonan/cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (n = 1). The phenotype of KRAS mutations was generally severe, including short stature, mental retardation, heart defects, etc. In conclusion, this investigation demonstrates that KRAS mutations are the cause in a minority of cases of Chinese patients with Noonan syndrome in Taiwan.

25808193
Oculoectodermal syndrome is a mosaic RASopathy associated with KRAS alterations
Oculoectodermal syndrome (OES) is a rare disease characterized by a combination of congenital scalp lesions and ocular dermoids, with additional manifestations including non-ossifying fibromas and giant cell granulomas of the jaw occurring during the first decade of life. To identify the genetic etiology of OES, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of several tissues in an affected individual. Comparison of DNA from a non-ossifying fibroma to blood-derived DNA allowed identification of a somatic missense alteration in KRAS NM_033360.3(KRAS):c.38G>A, resulting in p.Gly13Asp. This alteration was also observed in the patient's other affected tissues including the skin and muscle. Targeted sequencing in a second, unrelated OES patient identified an NM_033360.3(KRAS):c.57G>C, p.Leu19Phe alteration. Allelic frequencies fell below 40% in all tissues examined in both patients, suggesting that OES is a mosaic RAS-related disorder, or RASopathy. The characteristic findings in OES, including scalp lesions, ocular dermoids, and benign tumors, are found in other mosaic and germline RASopathies. This discovery also broadens our understanding of the spectrum of phenotypes resulting from KRAS alterations. Future research into disease progression with regard to malignancy risk and investigation of RAS-targeted therapies in OES is warranted. KRAS sequencing is clinically available and may also now improve OES diagnostic criteria.

21375404
A novel polymorphism in codon 25 of the KRAS gene associated with gallbladder carcinoma patients of the eastern part of India
Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is more prevalent than other cancers in North India. The asymptomatic nature of the disease is a problem in the diagnosis and treatment. Analysis of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes could be of importance in this regard. KRAS is the most frequently mutated member and is said to be one of the most activated oncogenes. The present study was aimed to determine the role of intragenic variants in the KRAS gene, in the progression of GBC in the eastern part of India. Sixty gallbladder carcinoma subjects (13 men and 47 women) with histologically proven diagnosis and 90 individuals (14 men and 76 women) who have no diagnosed cancer were included in the present study. All single-nucleotide polymorphisms present in exons 1 and 2 were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction followed by sequencing. We could not find the most frequently reported mutations at codons 12, 13, and 61 of the KRAS gene that occur in human malignancies. However, in this study, we detected one novel polymorphism at codon 25 (CAG>CAT; Gln25His) in exon 1 of the KRAS gene in both germline and tissue DNA. Multivariable logistic regression analysis with adjustment for age and sex revealed that the Gln25His variant of the KRAS gene was significantly associated with GBC. In silico analysis has validated the KRAS p.Q25H polymorphism as a disease-causing variant. Further, screening of the DNA samples in a cohort of ancestral tribal populations from various parts of the country without information on the phenotype, however, revealed the presence of the previously reported codon 12 and 25 polymorphisms, thereby indicating that the novel variant is population specific in the region.

20810036
Noonan syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus in a patient with a novel KRAS mutation
Noonan syndrome is characterised by distinct facial stigmata, short stature and congenital cardiopathy. It has a high genetic heterogeneity and mutations in six different genes can be involved. We report a patient with Noonan syndrome and a novel KRAS mutation who presents systemic lupus erythematosus.

26249544
Craniosynostosis and Noonan syndrome with KRAS mutations: Expanding the phenotype with a case report and review of the literature
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a multiple congenital anomaly syndrome caused by germline mutations in genes coding for components of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (RAS-MAPK) pathway. Features include short stature, characteristic facies, congenital heart anomalies, and developmental delay. While there is considerable clinical heterogeneity in NS, craniosynostosis is not a common feature of the condition. Here, we report on a 2 month-old girl with Noonan syndrome associated with a de novo mutation in KRAS (p.P34Q) and premature closure of the sagittal suture. We provide a review of the literature of germline KRAS mutations and find that approximately 10% of published cases have craniosynostosis. Our findings expand on the NS phenotype and suggest that germline mutations in the KRAS gene are causally involved in craniosynostosis, supporting the role of the RAS-MAPK pathway as a mediator of aberrant bone growth in cranial sutures. The inclusion of craniosynostosis as a possible phenotype in KRAS-associated Noonan Syndrome has implications in the differential diagnosis and surgical management of individuals with craniosynostosis.

30266093
Clinical exome sequencing for fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities and a suspected Mendelian disorder
Background:
        
      
      Exome sequencing is now being incorporated into clinical care for pediatric and adult populations, but its integration into prenatal diagnosis has been more limited. One reason for this is the paucity of information about the clinical utility of exome sequencing in the prenatal setting.

28957739
Novel mutations and their genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with Noonan syndrome, using next-generation sequencing
Purpose:
        
      
      Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with many variable and heterogeneous conditions. The genetic basis for 20-30% of cases is still unknown. This study evaluates Iranian Noonan patients both clinically and genetically for the first time.

30430033
Co-occurrence of Noonan and Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome Features in a Patient with KRAS Variant
We report the case of a 3-year-old girl, who is the third child of nonconsanguineous parents, with short stature, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and mild dysmorphic features; all suggestive of Noonan syndrome. In addition, the patient presents with feeding difficulties, deep palmar and plantar creases, sparse hair, and delayed psychomotor and language development, all characteristics frequently observed in cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. Molecular analysis of the Ras/ MAPK pathway genes using high-resolution melting curve analysis and gene sequencing revealed a de novo KRAS amino acid substitution of leucine to tryptophan at codon 53 (p.L53W). This substitution was recently described in an Iranian patient with Noonan syndrome. The findings described in this report expand the phenotypic heterogeneity observed in RASopathy patients harboring a KRAS substitution, and advocate for the inclusion of genes with low mutational frequency in genetic screening protocols for Noonan syndrome and other RASopathies.

19396835
Craniosynostosis in patients with Noonan syndrome caused by germline KRAS mutations
Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures, is a developmental defect that disrupts the cranial morphogenetic program, leading to variable dysmorphic craniofacial features and associated functional abnormalities. Craniosynostosis is frequently observed as an associated feature in a number of clinically and genetically heterogeneous syndromic conditions, including a group of disorders caused by activating mutations in genes coding for the fibroblast growth factor receptor family members FGFR1, FGFR2, and FGFR3. In these disorders, dysregulation of intracellular signaling promoted by the aberrant FGFR function is mediated, at least in part, by the RAS-MAPK transduction pathway. Mutations in KRAS, HRAS, and other genes coding for proteins participating in this signaling cascade have recently been identified as underlying Noonan syndrome (NS) and related disorders. While cardinal features of these syndromes include distinctive dysmorphic facial features, reduced growth, congenital heart defects, and variable ectodermal anomalies and cognitive impairment, craniosynostosis is not a recognized feature. Here, we report on the occurrence of premature closure of cranial sutures in subjects with NS, and their specific association with mutations in the KRAS gene. These findings highlight the pathogenetic significance of aberrant signaling mediated by the RAS signaling pathway in other known forms of craniosynostosis, and suggest that, even in the absence of radiologically demonstrable synostosis of the calvarian sutures, dysregulated growth and/or suture closure at specific craniofacial sites might contribute to the craniofacial anomalies occurring in NS.

24382853
A lethal course of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Noonan syndrome due to a novel germline mutation in the KRAS gene: case study
Noonan syndrome is a relatively common and heterogeneous genetic disorder, including congenital heart defect in more than half of the cases. If the defect is not large, life expectancy is normal. Here we report on a case of an infant with Noonan syndrome and rapidly progressive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with lethal outcome, in whom we identified a novel mutation in the KRAS gene. This heterozygous unclassified missense variant in exon 3: c.179G> T (p.Gly60Val) might be associated with a lethal form of Noonan syndrome. The malignant clinical course of the disease and the lethal outcome in an infant only a few months old might be connected to RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway hyperactivation, consequently promoting cell growth and proliferation, leading to rapidly progressive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Further biochemical and functional studies are needed to confirm this hypothesis.

27848944
Clinical exome sequencing: results from 2819 samples reflecting 1000 families
We report our results of 1000 diagnostic WES cases based on 2819 sequenced samples from 54 countries with a wide phenotypic spectrum. Clinical information given by the requesting physicians was translated to HPO terms. WES processes were performed according to standardized settings. We identified the underlying pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 307 families (30.7%). In further 253 families (25.3%) a variant of unknown significance, possibly explaining the clinical symptoms of the index patient was identified. WES enabled timely diagnosing of genetic diseases, validation of causality of specific genetic disorders of PTPN23, KCTD3, SCN3A, PPOX, FRMPD4, and SCN1B, and setting dual diagnoses by detecting two causative variants in distinct genes in the same patient. We observed a better diagnostic yield in consanguineous families, in severe and in syndromic phenotypes. Our results suggest that WES has a better yield in patients that present with several symptoms, rather than an isolated abnormality. We also validate the clinical benefit of WES as an effective diagnostic tool, particularly in nonspecific or heterogeneous phenotypes. We recommend WES as a first-line diagnostic in all cases without a clear differential diagnosis, to facilitate personal medical care.

31974414
An approach to integrating exome sequencing for fetal structural anomalies into clinical practice
Purpose:
        
      
      We investigated the diagnostic and clinical performance of trio exome sequencing (ES) in parent-fetus trios where the fetus had sonographic abnormalities but normal karyotype, microarray and, in some cases, normal gene-specific sequencing.

33790768
A Patient with Noonan Syndrome with a KRAS Mutation Who Presented Severe Nerve Root Hypertrophy
We report a 45-year-old female with clinical features resembling Noonan syndrome (NS) who presented with significant nerve root hypertrophy. She was initially diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease because her gait disturbance gradually deteriorated and nerve conduction velocity was reduced. However, she did not carry a PMP22 gene mutation. RASopathies are a group of phenotypically overlapping developmental syndromes caused by germline mutations that encode components of the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway. These disorders include NS, cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome, and Costello syndrome and are associated with molecular abnormalities in the Ras/MAPK pathway. The patient was suspected to have NS and related disorders because of pulmonary artery stenosis, lymphedema, distinctive facial appearance, and intellectual disability. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous de novo mutation in KRAS (c.211T>G, p.Tyr71Asp), which is usually observed in patients with NS or CFC syndrome. Although our patient was diagnosed with NS, she revealed clinical manifestations that were typical to CFC syndrome, including intellectual disability. It has been reported that some patients diagnosed with RASopathies with mutations in PTPN11, SOS1, or KRAS developed nerve root hypertrophy. These results suggest that nerve root hypertrophy may be associated with RASopathy, although the onset mechanisms of nerve root hypertrophy are unknown.

21797849
Two novel germline KRAS mutations: expanding the molecular and clinical phenotype
Noonan and Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndromes are characterized by typical dysmorphic features, cardiac defects, short stature, variable ectodermal anomalies, and intellectual disability. Both belong to the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway group of disorders and clinical features overlap other related conditions, notably LEOPARD and Costello syndromes. KRAS mutations account for about 2% of reported Noonan and <5% of reported CFC cases. The mutation spectrum includes recurrent missense changes clustering in particular domains of the KRAS protein and conferring gain-of-function. We report three patients from two unrelated families with novel missense KRAS mutations, p.K147E and p.Y71H. Both mutations affect a residue which is highly conserved in KRAS and other RAS isoforms. One of the families includes a mother and son pair who represent the first report of a vertically transmitted KRAS mutation. In addition, the mother and son pair had peripheral neuropathy, complicated by Charcot arthropathy in the mother. An unusual phenotypic effect of the specific KRAS mutation or a coincidence of two independent disorders may be considered. KRAS mutation-associated phenotypes appear to be subject to considerable clinical heterogeneity. All three cases highlight the challenges of clinical assessment in KRAS mutation-positive patients, and the utility of molecular testing as an adjunct to diagnosis.

23059812
Diverging gain-of-function mechanisms of two novel KRAS mutations associated with Noonan and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes
Activating somatic and germline mutations of closely related RAS genes (H, K, N) have been found in various types of cancer and in patients with developmental disorders, respectively. The involvement of the RAS signalling pathways in developmental disorders has recently emerged as one of the most important drivers in RAS research. In the present study, we investigated the biochemical and cell biological properties of two novel missense KRAS mutations (Y71H and K147E). Both mutations affect residues that are highly conserved within the RAS family. KRAS(Y71H) showed no clear differences to KRAS(wt), except for an increased binding affinity for its major effector, the RAF1 kinase. Consistent with this finding, even though we detected similar levels of active KRAS(Y71H) when compared with wild-type protein, we observed an increased activation of MEK1/2, irrespective of the stimulation conditions. In contrast, KRAS(K147E) exhibited a tremendous increase in nucleotide dissociation generating a self-activating RAS protein that can act independently of upstream signals. As a consequence, levels of active KRAS(K147E) were strongly increased regardless of serum stimulation and similar to the oncogenic KRAS(G12V). In spite of this, KRAS(K147E) downstream signalling did not reach the level triggered by oncogenic KRAS(G12V), especially because KRAS(K147E) was downregulated by RASGAP and moreover exhibited a 2-fold lower affinity for RAF kinase. Here, our findings clearly emphasize that individual RAS mutations, despite being associated with comparable phenotypes of developmental disorders in patients, can cause remarkably diverse biochemical effects with a common outcome, namely a rather moderate gain-of-function.

22488932
KRAS gene mutations in Noonan syndrome familial cases cluster in the vicinity of the switch II region of the G-domain: report of another family with metopic craniosynostosis
Noonan syndrome (NS) and Noonan-related disorders [cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC), Costello, Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NS-ML), and neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndromes (NFNS)] are a group of developmental disorders caused by mutations in genes of the RAS/MAPK pathway. Mutations in the KRAS gene account for only a small proportion of affected Noonan and CFC syndrome patients that present an intermediate phenotype between these two syndromes, with more frequent and severe intellectual disability in NS and less ectodermal involvement in CFC syndrome, as well as atypical clinical findings such as craniosynostosis. Recently, the first familial case with a novel KRAS mutation was described. We report on a second vertical transmission (a mother and two siblings) with a novel mutation (p.M72L), in which the proband has trigonocephaly and the affected mother and sister, prominent ectodermal involvement. Metopic suture involvement has not been described before, expanding the main different cranial sutures which can be affected in NS and KRAS gene mutations. The gene alteration found in the studied family is in close proximity to the one reported in the other familial case (close to the switch II region of the G-domain), suggesting that this specific region of the gene could have less severe effects on intellectual ability than the other KRAS gene mutations found in NS patients and be less likely to hamper reproductive fitness.

22302539
Characterization of a novel KRAS mutation identified in Noonan syndrome
Noonan syndrome (NS) is the most common non-chromosomal syndrome seen in children and is characterized by short stature, dysmorphic facial features, chest deformity, a wide range of congenital heart defects and developmental delay of variable degree. Mutations in the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways cause about 70% of NS cases with a KRAS mutation present in about 2%. In a cohort of 65 clinically confirmed NS patients of Japanese origin, we screened for mutations in the RAS genes by direct sequencing. We found a novel mutation in KRAS with an amino acid substitution of asparagine to serine at codon 116 (N116S). We analyzed the biological activity of this mutant by ectopic expression of wild-type or mutant KRAS. NS-associated KRAS mutation resulted in Erk activation and active Ras-GTP levels, and exhibited mild cell proliferation. In addition, kras-targeted morpholino knocked-down zebrafish embryos caused heart and craniofacial malformations, while the expression of mutated kras resulted in maldevelopment of the heart. Our findings implicate that N116S change in KRAS is a hyperactive mutation which is a causative agent of NS through maldevelopment of the heart.

31216405
Reanalysis of Clinical Exome Sequencing Data


29158550
Exome Pool-Seq in neurodevelopmental disorders
High throughput sequencing has greatly advanced disease gene identification, especially in heterogeneous entities. Despite falling costs this is still an expensive and laborious technique, particularly when studying large cohorts. To address this problem we applied Exome Pool-Seq as an economic and fast screening technology in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Sequencing of 96 individuals can be performed in eight pools of 12 samples on less than one Illumina sequencer lane. In a pilot study with 96 cases we identified 27 variants, likely or possibly affecting function. Twenty five of these were identified in 923 established NDD genes (based on SysID database, status November 2016) (ACTB, AHDC1, ANKRD11, ATP6V1B2, ATRX, CASK, CHD8, GNAS, IFIH1, KCNQ2, KMT2A, KRAS, MAOA, MED12, MED13L, RIT1, SETD5, SIN3A, TCF4, TRAPPC11, TUBA1A, WAC, ZBTB18, ZMYND11), two in 543 (SysID) candidate genes (ZNF292, BPTF), and additionally a de novo loss-of-function variant in LRRC7, not previously implicated in NDDs. Most of them were confirmed to be de novo, but we also identified X-linked or autosomal-dominantly or autosomal-recessively inherited variants. With a detection rate of 28%, Exome Pool-Seq achieves comparable results to individual exome analyses but reduces costs by >85%. Compared with other large scale approaches using Molecular Inversion Probes (MIP) or gene panels, it allows flexible re-analysis of data. Exome Pool-Seq is thus well suited for large-scale, cost-efficient and flexible screening in characterized but heterogeneous entities like NDDs.

16773572
Germline missense mutations affecting KRAS Isoform B are associated with a severe Noonan syndrome phenotype
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a developmental disorder characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphia, congenital heart disease, and multiple skeletal and hematologic defects. NS is an autosomal dominant trait and is genetically heterogeneous. Gain of function of SHP-2, a protein tyrosine phosphatase that positively modulates RAS signaling, is observed in nearly 50% of affected individuals. Here, we report the identification of heterozygous KRAS gene mutations in two subjects exhibiting a severe NS phenotype with features overlapping those of cardiofaciocutaneous and Costello syndromes. Both mutations were de novo and affected exon 6, which encodes the C-terminal portion of KRAS isoform B but does not contribute to KRAS isoform A. Structural analysis indicated that both substitutions (Val152Gly and Asp153Val) perturb the conformation of the guanine ring-binding pocket of the protein, predicting an increase in the guanine diphosphate/guanine triphosphate (GTP) dissociation rate that would favor GTP binding to the KRASB isoform and bypass the requirement for a guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

29758562
Clinical relevance of systematic phenotyping and exome sequencing in patients with short stature
PurposeShort stature is a common condition of great concern to patients and their families. Mostly genetic in origin, the underlying cause often remains elusive due to clinical and genetic heterogeneity.MethodsWe systematically phenotyped 565 patients where common nongenetic causes of short stature were excluded, selected 200 representative patients for whole-exome sequencing, and analyzed the identified variants for pathogenicity and the affected genes regarding their functional relevance for growth.ResultsBy standard targeted diagnostic and phenotype assessment, we identified a known disease cause in only 13.6% of the 565 patients. Whole-exome sequencing in 200 patients identified additional mutations in known short-stature genes in 16.5% of these patients who manifested only part of the symptomatology. In 15.5% of the 200 patients our findings were of significant clinical relevance. Heterozygous carriers of recessive skeletal dysplasia alleles represented 3.5% of the cases.ConclusionA combined approach of systematic phenotyping, targeted genetic testing, and whole-exome sequencing allows the identification of the underlying cause of short stature in at least 33% of cases, enabling physicians to improve diagnosis, treatment, and genetic counseling. Exome sequencing significantly increases the diagnostic yield and consequently care in patients with short stature.

33326660
Whole-exome sequencing of non-BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carrier cases at high-risk for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer
The current study aimed to identify new breast and/or ovarian cancer predisposition genes. For that, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed in the germline DNA of 52 non-BRCA1/BRCA2/TP53 mutation carrier women at high-risk for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). All variants were classified using information from population and disease specific databases, in silico prediction tools and the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) criteria. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of tumor samples and segregation analyses were performed whenever possible. The variants identified were investigated in a second, independent cohort of 17 BC cases. Pathogenic/Likely Pathogenic variants were identified in known cancer genes such as CHEK2, MUTYH, PMS2, and RAD51C. Rare and potentially pathogenic variants were identified in DNA repair genes (FAN1, POLQ, and RAD54L) and other cancer-related genes such as DROSHA and SLC34A2. Interestingly, the variant c.149T>G in the FAN1 gene was identified in two unrelated families, and exhibited LOH in the tumor tissue of one of them. In conclusion, this is the largest Brazilian WES study involving families at high-risk for HBOC which has brought novel insights into the role of potentially new genetic risk factors for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer.

17601930
De novo HRAS and KRAS mutations in two siblings with short stature and neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous features
Mutations in genes involved in Ras signalling cause Noonan syndrome and other disorders characterised by growth disturbances and variable neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous features. We describe two sisters, 46 and 31 years old, who presented with dysmorphic features, hypotonia, feeding difficulties, retarded growth and psychomotor retardation early in life. The patients were initially diagnosed with Costello syndrome, and autosomal recessive inheritance was assumed. Remarkably, however, we identified a germline HRAS mutation (G12A) in one sister and a germline KRAS mutation (F156L) in her sibling. Both mutations had arisen de novo. The F156L mutant K-Ras protein accumulated in the active, guanosine triphosphate-bound conformation and affected downstream signalling. The patient harbouring this mutation was followed for three decades, and her cardiac hypertrophy gradually normalised. However, she developed severe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis and atrophy. The occurrence of distinct de novo mutations adds to variable expressivity and gonadal mosaicism as possible explanations of how an autosomal dominant disease may manifest as an apparently recessive condition.

21686750
De novo HRAS and KRAS mutations in two siblings with short stature and neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous features
Mutations in genes involved in Ras signalling cause Noonan syndrome and other disorders characterised by growth disturbances and variable neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous features. We describe two sisters, who presented with dysmorphic features, hypotonia, retarded growth and psychomotor retardation. The patients were initially diagnosed with Costello syndrome, an autosomal recessive inheritance was assumed. Remarkably, however, we identified a germline HRAS mutation (G12A) in one sister and a germline KRAS mutation (F156L) in her sibling. Both mutations had arisen de novo. The F156L mutant K-Ras protein accumulated in the active, guanosine triphosphate-bound conformation and affected downstream signalling. The patient harbouring this mutation was followed for three decades, and her cardiac hypertrophy gradually normalised. However, she developed severe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis and atrophy. The occurrence of distinct de novo mutations adds to variable expressivity and gonadal mosaicism as possible explanations of how an autosomal dominant disease may manifest as an apparently recessive condition.

24552817
Extensive sequence variation in the 3' untranslated region of the KRAS gene in lung and ovarian cancer cases
While cancer is a serious health issue, there are very few genetic biomarkers that predict predisposition, prognosis, diagnosis, and treatment response. Recently, sequence variations that disrupt microRNA (miRNA)-mediated regulation of genes have been shown to be associated with many human diseases, including cancer. In an early example, a variant at one particular single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in a let-7 miRNA complementary site in the 3' untranslated region (3' UTR) of the KRAS gene was associated with risk and outcome of various cancers. The KRAS oncogene is an important regulator of cellular proliferation, and is frequently mutated in cancers. To discover additional sequence variants in the 3' UTR of KRAS with the potential as genetic biomarkers, we resequenced the complete region of the 3' UTR of KRAS in multiple non-small cell lung cancer and epithelial ovarian cancer cases either by Sanger sequencing or capture enrichment followed by high-throughput sequencing. Here we report a comprehensive list of sequence variations identified in cases, with some potentially dysregulating expression of KRAS by altering putative miRNA complementary sites. Notably, rs712, rs9266, and one novel variant may have a functional role in regulation of KRAS by disrupting complementary sites of various miRNAs, including let-7 and miR-181.

25961464
Estrogen withdrawal, increased breast cancer risk and the KRAS-variant
The KRAS-variant is a biologically functional, microRNA binding site variant, which predicts increased cancer risk especially for women. Because external exposures, such as chemotherapy, differentially impact the effect of this mutation, we evaluated the association of estrogen exposures, breast cancer (BC) risk and tumor biology in women with the KRAS-variant. Women with BC (n = 1712), the subset with the KRAS-variant (n = 286) and KRAS-variant unaffected controls (n = 80) were evaluated, and hormonal exposures, KRAS-variant status, and pathology were compared. The impact of estrogen withdrawal on transformation of isogenic normal breast cell lines with or without the KRAS-variant was studied. Finally, the association and presentation characteristics of the KRAS-variant and multiple primary breast cancer (MPBC) were evaluated. KRAS-variant BC patients were more likely to have ovarian removal pre-BC diagnosis than non-variant BC patients (p = 0.033). In addition, KRAS-variant BC patients also appeared to have a lower estrogen state than KRAS-variant unaffected controls, with a lower BMI (P < 0.001). Finally, hormone replacement therapy (HRT) discontinuation in KRAS-variant patients was associated with a diagnosis of triple negative BC (P < 0.001). Biologically confirming our clinical findings, acute estrogen withdrawal led to oncogenic transformation in KRAS-variant positive isogenic cell lines. Finally, KRAS-variant BC patients had greater than an 11-fold increased risk of presenting with MPBC compared to non-variant patients (45.39% vs 6.78%, OR 11.44 [3.42-37.87], P < 0.001). Thus, estrogen withdrawal and a low estrogen state appear to increase BC risk and to predict aggressive tumor biology in women with the KRAS-variant, who are also significantly more likely to present with multiple primary breast cancer.

18922928
A SNP in a let-7 microRNA complementary site in the KRAS 3' untranslated region increases non-small cell lung cancer risk
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide, yet few genetic markers of lung cancer risk useful for screening exist. The let-7 family-of-microRNAs (miRNA) are global genetic regulators important in controlling lung cancer oncogene expression by binding to the 3' untranslated regions of their target mRNAs. The purpose of this study was to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) that could modify let-7 binding and to assess the effect of such SNPs on target gene regulation and risk for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). let-7 complementary sites (LCS) were sequenced in the KRAS 3' untranslated region from 74 NSCLC cases to identify mutations and SNPs that correlated with NSCLC. The allele frequency of a previously unidentified SNP at LCS6 was characterized in 2,433 people (representing 46 human populations). The frequency of the variant allele is 18.1% to 20.3% in NSCLC patients and 5.8% in world populations. The association between the SNP and the risk for NSCLC was defined in two independent case-control studies. A case-control study of lung cancer from New Mexico showed a 2.3-fold increased risk (confidence interval, 1.1-4.6; P = 0.02) for NSCLC cancer in patients who smoked <40 pack-years. This association was validated in a second independent case-control study. Functionally, the variant allele results in KRAS overexpression in vitro. The LCS6 variant allele in a KRAS miRANA complementary site is significantly associated with increased risk for NSCLC among moderate smokers and represents a new paradigm for let-7 miRNAs in lung cancer susceptibility.

19380522
A let-7 microRNA-binding site polymorphism in the KRAS 3' UTR is associated with reduced survival in oral cancers
MicroRNA (miRNA)-binding site polymorphisms that could contribute to disease risk and prognosis are rapidly being identified and investigated as this genetic variation may have a potentially profound impact on human health. A recently described variant allele in the KRAS 3' untranslated region that arises in the let-7 miRNA complementary site (KRAS-LCS6) and leads to increased KRAS expression in lung cancer was examined for its association with the occurrence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We examined the prevalence of the KRAS-LCS6 variant allele in a population-based case-control study of HNSCC to determine if this KRAS-LCS6 genotype was associated with disease occurrence and patient survival. Although the KRAS-LCS6 variant genotype was not associated with the overall risk of HNSCC, cases with the KRAS-LCS6 variant genotype had significantly reduced survival [hazard ratio (HR), 1.6; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.0-2.5] in models controlled for confounders of survival. This risk was greatest in cases of oral cavity carcinoma (HR, 2.7; 95% CI, 1.4-5.3). These data demonstrate that cases with the KRAS-LCS6 variant have significantly reduced survival time and suggest that this variant may alter the phenotype or therapeutic response of this disease.

20647319
A KRAS-variant in ovarian cancer acts as a genetic marker of cancer risk
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the single most deadly form of women's cancer, typically presenting as an advanced disease at diagnosis in part due to a lack of known risk factors or genetic markers of risk. The KRAS oncogene and altered levels of the microRNA (miRNA) let-7 are associated with an increased risk of developing solid tumors. In this study, we investigated a hypothesized association between an increased risk of OC and a variant allele of KRAS at rs61764370, referred to as the KRAS-variant, which disrupts a let-7 miRNA binding site in this oncogene. Specimens obtained were tested for the presence of the KRAS-variant from nonselected OC patients in three independent cohorts, two independent ovarian case-control studies, and OC patients with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) as well as their family members. Our results indicate that the KRAS-variant is associated with more than 25% of nonselected OC cases. Further, we found that it is a marker for a significant increased risk of developing OC, as confirmed by two independent case-control analyses. Lastly, we determined that the KRAS-variant was present in 61% of HBOC patients without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, previously considered uninformative, as well as in their family members with cancer. Our findings strongly support the hypothesis that the KRAS-variant is a genetic marker for increased risk of developing OC, and they suggest that the KRAS-variant may be a new genetic marker of cancer risk for HBOC families without other known genetic abnormalities.

21118967
Genetic variants in MicroRNA biosynthesis pathways and binding sites modify ovarian cancer risk, survival, and treatment response
MicroRNAs (miRNA) play important roles in tumorigenesis. Genetic variations in miRNA processing genes and miRNA binding sites may affect the biogenesis of miRNA and the regulatory effect of miRNAs to their target genes, hence promoting tumorigenesis. This study analyzed 226 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in miRNA processing genes and miRNA binding sites in 339 ovarian cancer cases and 349 healthy controls to assess association with cancer risk, overall survival, and treatment response. Thirteen polymorphisms were found to have significant association with risk. The most significant were 2 linked SNPs (r(2) = 0.99), rs2740351 and rs7813 in GEMIN4 [odds ratio (OR) = 0.71; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.57-0.87 and OR = 0.71; 95% CI, 0.57-0.88, respectively]. Unfavorable genotype analysis showed the cumulative effect of these 13 SNPs on risk (P for trend < 0.0001). Potential higher order gene-gene interactions were identified, which categorized patients into different risk groups according to their genotypic signatures. In the clinical outcome study, 24 SNPs exhibited significant association with overall survival and 17 SNPs with treatment response. Notably, patients carrying a rare homozygous genotype of rs1425486 in PDGFC had poorer overall survival [hazard ratio (HR) = 2.69; 95% CI, 1.67-4.33] and worse treatment response (OR = 3.38; 95% CI, 1.39-8.19), compared to carriers of common homozygous and heterozygous genotypes. Unfavorable genotype analyses also showed a strong gene-dosage effect with decreased survival and increased risk of treatment nonresponse in patients with greater number of unfavorable genotypes (P for trend < 0.0001). Taken together, miRNA-related genetic polymorphisms may impact ovarian cancer predisposition and clinical outcome both individually and jointly.

30762279
Prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in the RASopathy genes in patients who have had panel testing for cardiomyopathy
RASopathies are a group of developmental disorders caused by pathogenic variants in the RAS-MAPK pathway. Cardiomyopathy is a major feature of this group of disorders, specifically hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). HCM can be the first presenting feature in individuals with RASopathies. We conducted a retrospective study of all individuals who have had a cardiomyopathy gene panel ordered through our institution to determine the prevalence of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in RAS pathway genes in individuals with cardiomyopathy. We evaluated variants in the following genes: BRAF, CBL, HRAS, KRAS, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, NF1, NRAS, PTPN11, RAF1, SHOC2, and SOS1. We reviewed 74 cases with cardiomyopathy, including 32 with HCM, 24 with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), nine with both left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) and DCM, four with LVNC only, two with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) and three with unspecified cardiomyopathy. We identified four patients (5.41%) with pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in HRAS, PTPN11 and RAF1 (two individuals). Indication for testing for all four individuals was HCM. The prevalence of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in RASopathy genes in our HCM patient cohort is 12.5% (4/32). We conclude that the RASopathy genes should be included on multi-gene panels for cardiomyopathy to increase diagnostic yield for individuals with HCM.

25315429
Deletions of chromosomal regulatory boundaries are associated with congenital disease
Background:
        
      
      Recent data from genome-wide chromosome conformation capture analysis indicate that the human genome is divided into conserved megabase-sized self-interacting regions called topological domains. These topological domains form the regulatory backbone of the genome and are separated by regulatory boundary elements or barriers. Copy-number variations can potentially alter the topological domain architecture by deleting or duplicating the barriers and thereby allowing enhancers from neighboring domains to ectopically activate genes causing misexpression and disease, a mutational mechanism that has recently been termed enhancer adoption.

27450488
Copy number variants and rasopathies: germline KRAS duplication in a patient with syndrome including pigmentation abnormalities
RAS/MAPK pathway germline mutations were described in Rasopathies, a class of rare genetic syndromes combining facial abnormalities, heart defects, short stature, skin and genital abnormalities, and mental retardation. The majority of the mutations identified in the Rasopathies are point mutations which increase RAS/MAPK pathway signaling. Duplications encompassing RAS/MAPK pathway genes (PTPN11, RAF1, MEK2, or SHOC2) were more rarely described. Here we report, a syndromic familial case of a 12p duplication encompassing the dosage sensitive gene KRAS, whose phenotype overlapped with rasopathies. The patient was referred because of a history of mild learning disabilities, small size, facial dysmorphy, and pigmentation abnormalities (café-au-lait and achromic spots, and axillar lentigines). This phenotype was reminiscent of rasopathies. No mutation was identified in the most common genes associated with Noonan, cardio-facio-cutaneous, Legius, and Costello syndromes, as well as neurofibromatosis type 1. The patient constitutional DNA exhibited a ~10.5 Mb duplication at 12p, including the KRAS gene. The index case's mother carried the same chromosome abnormality and also showed development delay with short stature, and numerous café-au-lait spots. Duplication of the KRAS gene may participate in the propositus phenotype, in particular of the specific pigmentation abnormalities. Array-CGH or some other assessment of gene/exon CNVs of RAS/MAPK pathway genes should be considered in the evaluation of individuals with rasopathies.

18433509
Clinical characterization and the mutation spectrum in Swedish adenomatous polyposis families
Background:
        
      
      The dominantly inherited condition familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the APC gene. Finding the causative mutations has great implications for the families. Correlating the genotypes to the phenotypes could help to improve the diagnosis and follow-up of patients.

22987206
Novel mutations of the APC gene and genetic consequences of splicing mutations in the Czech FAP families
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome with almost 100 % risk of colorectal cancer. The typical FAP is characterized by hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps and by extracolonic manifestations, later onset and lower number of polyps in colon is characteristic of an attenuated form (AFAP). We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 90 FAP/AFAP patients. Mutation screening was performed using Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis. DNA fragments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern were sequenced. APC-mutation-negative probands were screened for large deletions of the APC gene using multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification. Analysis of mRNA variants followed in probands with possible splicing mutation by PCR amplification of target site flanking exons and sequencing the normal and aberrant products. We identified 30 germline variants among 36 unrelated probands including large deletions. Eleven APC variants detected last two years have not been reported yet. At all, fifteen of them are expected to cause errors in mRNA splicing. Analysis of mRNA in ten of these patients revealed exon skipping in seven cases, exonisation of intron in one of these as well, change of the amount of alternatively spliced product in one case, and no effect was found in three cases. In two of the patients, the biopsy of colon mucosa and polyp enabled us to examine the effect of the mutation on splicing pattern in colon cells directly. The comparison of alternative and standard transcript amount showed similar transcription pattern of exon 14 in control colon mucosa tissue (9 samples) as in 51 blood control samples.

17411426
Novel APC mutations in Czech and Slovak FAP families: clinical and genetic aspects
Background:
        
      
      Germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis gene (APC) result in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder predisposing to colorectal cancer. Typical FAP is characterized by hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps and by several extracolonic manifestations. An attenuated form of polyposis (AFAP) is characterized by less than 100 adenomas and later onset of the disease.

20685668
Germline APC mutation spectrum derived from 863 genomic variations identified through a 15-year medical genetics service to French patients with FAP
Heterozygous APC germline alteration is responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis, a colon cancer predisposition with almost complete penetrance. Point mutations generally lead to truncated proteins or no protein at all. They mainly involve exon 3 to codon 1700 (exon 15). The work presented here delineates precisely the APC mutation spectrum from 15 years of systematic molecular screening which identified 863 independent alterations in the French population.

31285513
Contribution of New Adenomatous Polyposis Predisposition Genes in an Unexplained Attenuated Spanish Cohort by Multigene Panel Testing
Attenuated adenomatous polyposis (AAP) is a heterogeneous syndrome in terms of clinical manifestations, heritability and etiology of the disease. Genetic heterogeneity and low penetrance alleles are probably the best explanation for this variability. Certainly, it is known that APC and MUTYH are high penetrance predisposition genes for adenomatous polyposis, but they only account for 5-10% of AAP. Other new predisposition genes, such as POLE, POLD1, NTHL1, AXIN2 or MSH3, have been recently described and have been associated with AAP, but their relative contribution is still not well defined. In order to evaluate the genetic predisposition to AAP in a hospital based population, germline DNAs from 158 AAP subjects were screened for genetic variants in the coding regions and intron-exon boundaries of seven associated genes through a next-generation sequencing (NGS) custom gene panel. Splicing, segregation studies, somatic mutational screening and RNA quantitative expression assays were conducted for selected variants. In four of the probands the adenoma susceptibility could be explained by actionable mutations in APC or MUTYH, and one other patient was a double carrier of two truncating variants in both POLE and NTHL1. Furthermore, 16 additional patients harbored uncertain significance variants in the remaining tested genes. This report gives information about the contribution of the newly described adenomatous polyposis predisposition genes in a Spanish attenuated polyposis cohort. Our results highly support the convenience of NGS multigene panels for attenuated polyposis genetic screening and reveals POLE frameshift variants as a plausible susceptibility mechanism for AAP.

24549056
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis manifests as autosomal dominant late-onset colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer (CRC) risk is well defined for families of patients with classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, the risk for those with an attenuated form of FAP is less well characterised. In this study, we estimated CRC risks for carriers of a novel germline mutation in the APC gene that causes attenuated FAP (AFAP). We performed genetic testing on 53 individuals from seven AFAP families harbouring an identical APC:c.288T>A mutation. Using a modified segregation analysis, we estimated relative and absolute CRC risks for mutation carriers. Twenty-three individuals harboured the disease causing mutation. CRC occurred in 28 individuals (mean 61.7 years, range 32-80 years). The estimated CRC relative risks for mutation carriers aged 60-69 and ≥70 years were 19 (95% CI: 1.77-204.08) and 45 (95% CI: 11.32-180.10), respectively, while the absolute CRC lifetime risk for men was 94% (95% CI: 67.5-99.9%), and for women, 84% (95% CI: 50.9-99.0%). This study shows that AFAP can manifest as autosomal dominant late-onset CRC. These findings highlight a subgroup of inherited CRCs that require new criteria for identification and surveillance.

31113927
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Gene Mutations in 22 Chinese Pedigrees with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
BACKGROUND Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which has a very high tendency of progression to colorectal cancer, is mainly caused by mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. This study systematically screened the APC mutations and observed the correlation of APC mutations with clinical manifestations of FAP. MATERIAL AND METHODS Eighty subjects (probands and their family members of 22 FAP pedigrees) were enrolled, underwent abdominal ultrasound, computed tomography, and colonoscopic examinations, and were assessed for APC mutations between January 2010 and June 2015 at Tianjin Union Medical Center. Peripheral blood was collected from subjects, and DNA was extracted and screened for APC mutations using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification for large-fragment deletions or PCR-denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography with DNA sequencing for micromutations. RESULTS Nineteen of 22 FAP pedigrees were found to have mutations of APC, and 17 types APC mutations were identified. All the mutations were heterozygosity with autosomal dominant inheritance. APC mutations included 8 caused by frameshift, 3 by aberrant splicing, 2 by missense mutation, 2 by nonsense mutation, and 2 by large-fragment deletion. Frameshift mutation was the most common type of APC mutation, and Coding DNA Sequence 15 was the most common mutation site. Five novel APC mutations, including 1 with large-fragment deletion, were identified. CONCLUSIONS We systematically screened 17 mutations of APC from 22 Chinese pedigrees with FAP. This study will broaden the spectrum of known APC germline mutations and help understand the types and distribution of APC mutations among Chinese patients with FAP.

33193653
New Pathogenic Germline Variants in Very Early Onset and Familial Colorectal Cancer Patients
A genetic diagnosis facilitates personalized cancer treatment and clinical care of relatives at risk, however, although 25% of colorectal cancer cases are familial, around 95% of the families are genetically unresolved. In this study, we performed gene panel analysis on germline DNA of 32 established or candidate colorectal cancer predisposing genes in 149 individuals from either families with an accumulation of colorectal cancers or families with only one sporadic case of very early onset colorectal cancer (≤40 years at diagnosis). We identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic genetic variants in 10.1% of the participants in genes such as APC, POLE, MSH2 or PMS2. The MSH2 variant, c.2168C>T, p.(Ser723Phe) was previously described as a variant of unknown significance, but we have now reclassified it to be likely pathogenic. The POLE variant, c.1089C>A, p.(Asn363Lys) was identified in a patient with three metachronous colorectal cancers from age 28 and turned out to be de novo. One pathogenic PMS2 variant was novel. We also identified a number of highly interesting variants of unknown significance in APC, BUB1, TP53 and RPS20. The RPS20 variant is novel and was found in a large Amsterdam I positive family with a multi tumor phenotype including 12 cases of CRC from as early as age 24. This variant was found to segregate with cancer in the family and multiple in silico tools predict it to be pathogenic. Our data further support the shift from phenotypic-based cancer panels to large panels including all established genes involved in hereditary cancer syndromes or (targeted) whole genome sequencing. Additionally, identification of a likely disease-predisposing variant in RPS20 expands the phenotypic spectrum of RPS20-related cancers and emphasize that this gene is relevant to include in colorectal cancer gene panels.

32292534
A rare missense variant in APC interrupts splicing and causes AFAP in two Danish families
Background:
        
      
      We report the first case of a missense variant in the APC gene that interrupts splicing by creating a new cryptic acceptor site. The variant, c.289G>A, p.(Gly97Arg), is located in exon 3, and qualitative and semi-quantitative RNA splicing analysis reveal that the variant results in skipping of the last 70 nucleotides of the exon, which leads to the introduction of a frameshift and a premature stop codon.

7833149
Mutational analysis of the first 14 exons of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene
In the present study, the polymerase chain reaction single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) technique has been applied to the mutation analysis of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. We examined the first 14 exons of the APC gene in 46 polyposis coli patients. Five germline mutations were observed, including a single-nucleotide substitution and small (1-4 bp) deletions leading, in 4 cases, to a stop codon. A missense mutation in exon 3 and a 1 bp deletion in exon 4 of the APC gene were observed in patients presenting with the attenuated form of FAP.

11606402
Nontruncating APC germ-line mutations and mismatch repair deficiency play a minor role in APC mutation-negative polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis, an autosomal-dominantly inherited colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome, is caused by germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Despite the use of different screening methods, studies worldwide fail to identify APC mutations in 20-50% of all familial adenomatous polyposis patients (APC mutation-negatives). In this study, missense mutations in the coding region of the APC gene, which would have been missed by the protein truncation test, as well as mutations in the APC promoter and the 3' untranslated region, were determined by the single nucleotide polymorphism discovery assay and direct DNA sequencing in 31 mutation-negative polyposis patients. Seventeen gene alterations were identified, whereof four (12.9%) represent possibly pathogenic germ-line mutations: silent A290T (promoter) and A8822G (3' untranslated region) as well as missense R99W and E1317Q (coding region). The 27 remaining, truly APC mutation-negative polyposis patients displayed a significantly later age at diagnosis compared with APC mutation carriers (46.1 versus 35.2 years; P < 0.01). APC mutation-negative individuals with >100 colonic polyps were more likely to present with extracolonic disease (P < 0.05) than those with <100. Assessment of microsatellite instability (MSI), a hallmark of mismatch repair deficiency, in 68 tumors from 21 truly APC mutation-negative patients, identified 4 (5.9%) unstable tubulo-villous adenomas (3 MSI-High and 1 MSI-Low), stemming from 4 (19%) unrelated individuals and likely to be caused by hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation. In conclusion, only a small proportion of APC germ-line mutation carriers is missed by the protein truncation test, and mismatch repair deficiency does not seem to substantially contribute to tumor development in APC mutation-negative polyposis patients.

21859464
Messing up disorder: how do missense mutations in the tumor suppressor protein APC lead to cancer?
Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene strongly predispose to development of gastro-intestinal tumors. Central to the tumorigenic events in APC mutant cells is the uncontrolled stabilization and transcriptional activation of the protein β-catenin. Many questions remain as to how APC controls β-catenin degradation. Remarkably, the large C-terminal region of APC, which spans over 2000 amino acids and includes critical regions in downregulating β-catenin, is predicted to be natively unfolded. Here we discuss how this uncommonly large disordered region may help to coordinate the multiple cellular functions of APC. Recently, a significant number of germline and somatic missense mutations in the central region of APC were linked to tumorigenesis in the colon as well as extra-intestinal tissues. We classify and localize all currently known missense mutations in the APC structure. The molecular basis by which these mutations interfere with the function of APC remains unresolved. We propose several mechanisms by which cancer-related missense mutations in the large disordered domain of APC may interfere with tumor suppressor activity. Insight in the underlying molecular events will be invaluable in the development of novel strategies to counter dysregulated Wnt signaling by APC mutations in cancer.

9664575
Rapid RT-PCR-based protein truncation test in the screening for 5' located mutations of the APC gene
Although in vitro protein synthesis is a rapid method to screen for translational stops in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, truncating mutations at the 5' most end are at risk of being overseen due to their small size. The authors describe a reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based protein truncation test specifically designed for detecting truncated polypeptide chains of less than 10 kDa. Using this detection system, three novel germline mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients were identified, i.e. a Gly101 Ter non-sense mutation in exon 3, an exon 4 splice acceptor mutation and a 555delC deletion in exon 5. Morever, a patient manifesting congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigmented epithelium (CHPRE) was detected with an Arg232Ter mutation in exon 6. This is, to the authors' knowledge, the fourth exception to the rule that FAP patients manifesting CHRPE harbour genetic alternations downstream from APC exon 9. Hence, an alternative hotspot for non-sense mutations associated with CHRPE appears to encompass the codons 215, 216 and 232. Patients reported in this study, exhibited relatively mild clinical symptoms with respect to the age of onset of malignancy (> 50 years of age) and the number of polyps (70-100 adenomas). However, manifestation of severe duodenal adenomatosis was independent of the attenuated colorectal FAP phenotype.

21142386
Andalusian Registry for familial adenomatous polyposis. Analysis of patients included
Objective:
        
      
      To evaluate the phenotype and genotype characteristic of patients included in the Andalusian Registry for familial adenomatous polyposis, the genotype/phenotype correlation and the impact of Registry in the frequency of colorectal cancer of registered.

18199528
Multiple rare nonsynonymous variants in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene predispose to colorectal adenomas
It has been proposed that multiple rare variants in numerous genes collectively account for a substantial proportion of multifactorial inherited predisposition to a variety of diseases, including colorectal adenomas (CRA). We have studied this hypothesis by sequencing the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in 691 unrelated North American patients with CRAs and 969 matched healthy controls. Rare inherited nonsynonymous variants of APC were significantly overrepresented in patients who did not carry conventional pathogenic mutations in the APC or MutY homologue genes [non-familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) non-MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) patients; 81 of 480, 16.9%] compared with patients with FAP or MAP (20 of 211, 9.5%, P = 0.0113), and this overrepresentation was highest in those non-FAP non-MAP patients with 11 to 99 CRAs (30 of 161, 18.6%, P = 0.0103). Furthermore, significantly more non-FAP non-MAP patients carried rare nonsynonymous variants in the functionally important beta-catenin down-regulating domain compared with healthy controls (32 of 480 versus 37 of 969, P = 0.0166). In silico analyses predicted that approximately 46% of the 61 different variants identified were likely to affect function, and upon testing, 7 of 16 nonsynonymous variants were shown to alter beta-catenin-regulated transcription in vitro. These data suggest that multiple rare nonsynonymous variants in APC play a significant role in predisposing to CRAs.

11960572
Detection of sequence variations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography
We have evaluated the usefulness of denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) for scanning the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene for point mutations, small deletions, and insertions. Our assay consists of 28 sets of primers to amplify the 15 exons of the APC gene. All PCR reactions were amplified simultaneously using the same reaction conditions in a 96-well format and then analyzed by dHPLC, using empirically determined optimum temperatures for partial fragment denaturation. Previously studied DNA specimens from 47 familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients were analyzed by dHPLC and all mutations were correctly identified and confirmed by sequence analysis. This approach identified a single-base substitution in exon 6 and a 2-bp insertion in exon 15 that initially had not been detected by single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. A novel mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene, 2065delG (codon 689) that had previously been undetected by the protein truncation test (PTT) was also identified by dHPLC. We present our validation studies of dHPLC technology for APC gene analysis in terms of sensitivity and specificity and compare it to current standard scanning technologies including PTT, SSCP, and conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE).

9375853
APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis families in the Northwest of England
We have investigated a series of FAP patients in the Northwest of England in order to identify and characterise the specific APC mutations. Using SSCP, we found 27 mutations in a total of 50 families investigated. The mutations were predominantly frameshift or nonsense mutations and there were two splice site changes. We have described two patients with severe Gardner's phenotype from different ethnic backgrounds who share the same mutation at codon 1537. Although the frequency of the most common mutation appears low, it is not dissimilar to that reported by other groups.

11933206
APC germline mutations identified in Czech patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer, which is caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The APC mutations have been investigated in 46 Czech unrelated FAP families and 9 suspected FAP families using DGGE analysis and direct DNA sequencing. We found 25 germline APC mutations and identified 11 which were not previously reported. Of the identified mutations, 10 were 1 to 5 bp deletions, four were 1 bp insertions and six were nonsense, all leading to the formation of premature stop codon. In addition, we detected two mutations in the splice-donor region of APC intron 11, one missense and two samesense mutations. Phenotypes of patients with known and novel types of mutations are presented and discussed.

18612690
Missense polymorphisms in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene and colorectal cancer risk
Purpose:
        
      
      Whereas truncating germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene give rise to familial adenomatous polyposis, missense polymorphisms of APC may confer a weaker risk for colorectal cancer.

17489848
Germline mutations in APC and MUTYH are responsible for the majority of families with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis
A small fraction of families with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) display an attenuated form of FAP (AFAP). We aimed to assess the presence of germline mutations in the MUTYH and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) genes in AFAP families and to compare the clinical features between the two causative genes. Families with clinical AFAP were selected from the Dutch Polyposis Registry according to the following criteria: (a) at least two patients with 10-99 adenomas diagnosed at age >30 years or (b) one patient with 10-99 adenomas at age >30 years and a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer (CRC) with a few adenomas, and, applying for both criteria, no family members with more than 100 polyps before the age of 30 years. All probands were screened for germline mutations in the APC and MUTYH genes. Twenty-five of 315 Dutch families with FAP (8%) met our criteria for AFAP. These families included 146 patients with adenomas and/or CRC. Germline APC mutations were identified in nine families and biallelic MUTYH mutations in another nine families. CRC was identified at a mean age of 54 years (range 24-83 years) in families with APC and at 50 years (range 39-70 years) in families with MUTYH (p = 0.29). APC and biallelic MUTYH mutations are responsible for the majority of AFAP families. Based on our results and those reported in the literature, we recommend colonoscopy once every 2 years in AFAP families, starting surveillance from the late teens in APC mutation carriers and from age 20-25 years in biallelic MUTYH mutation carriers.

21078199
Identification of 5 novel germline APC mutations and characterization of clinical phenotypes in Japanese patients with classical and attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease characterized by multiple colorectal adenomatous polyps and frequent extracolonic manifestations. An attenuated form of FAP (AFAP) is diagnosed based on a milder colorectal phenotype, and the colorectal phenotype of (A)FAP has been linked to germline APC mutations. The relationships between the spectrum of mutations and extracolonic manifestations are quite well known, but they need to be further defined.

8381580
Germ-line mutations in the first 14 exons of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene
The first 14 exons of the APC gene have been screened by the denaturation gradient gel electrophoresis method in 160 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) syndrome. Four polymorphic variants corresponding to silent mutations not associated with the disease phenotype were observed. Mutations predicted to alter the coding property of the APC gene were observed in 26 patients. All these mutations are expected to lead either to aberrant splicing, to synthesis of a truncated APC protein because of the emergence of a stop codon, or to a change in the translation reading frame. Single-base-pair substitutions were observed on 21 occasions. The most frequent mutation (eight cases) was a C-to-T change which exclusively occurred on the nontranscribed strand within a CG dinucleotide.

27623068
Age- and Gender-Specific Risk of Thyroid Cancer in Patients With Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Context:
        
      
      The cribriform-morula variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (CMV-PTC) is a rare variant of PTC and is associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, the incidence and the nature of CMV-PTC among FAP patients have not been well characterized.

8956059
Three novel APC gene mutations in Portuguese FAP kindreds


11839722
Serrated adenoma in familial adenomatous polyposis: relation to germline APC gene mutation
Background:
        
      
      Serrated adenoma is a precursor of colorectal cancer.

32025882
Dento-osseous anomalies in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: A follow-up study
Objective:
        
      
      The aim of this longitudinal study was to characterize the dento-osseous phenotype of eleven familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients and twenty-two family members from four Brazilian families who were followed over nine years and to investigate adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene variants using a targeted next-generation sequencing approach.

9585611
Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli
Germ-line mutations of the tumor suppressor APC are implicated in attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC), a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). AAPC is recognized by the occurrence of <100 colonic adenomas and a later onset of colorectal cancer (age >40 years). The aim of this study was to assess genotype-phenotype correlations in AAPC families. By protein-truncation test (PTT) assay, the entire coding region of the APC gene was screened in affected individuals from 11 AAPC kindreds, and their phenotypic differences were examined. Five novel germ-line APC mutations were identified in seven kindreds. Mutations were located in three different regions of the APC gene: (1) at the 5' end spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3' distal end of the gene. Variability in the number of colorectal adenomas was most apparent in individuals with mutations in region 1, and upper-gastrointestinal manifestations were more severe in them. In individuals with mutations in either region 2 or region 3, the average number of adenomas tended to be lower than those in individuals with mutations in region 1, although age at diagnosis was similar. In all AAPC kindreds, a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal polyp sparing was observed. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds. Our data suggest that, in AAPC families, the location of the APC mutation may partially predict specific phenotypic expression. This should help in the design of tailored clinical-management protocols in this subset of FAP patients.

8990002
Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 105 Dutch kindreds with familial adenomatous polyposis: 67 germline mutations identified by DGGE, PTT, and southern analysis
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer. We screened the entire coding region of the APC gene for mutations in an unselected series of 105 Dutch FAP kindreds. For the analysis of exons 1-14, we employed the GC-clamped denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), while the large exon 15 was examined using the protein truncation test. Using this approach, we identified 65 pathogenic mutations in the above 105 apparently unrelated FAP families. The mutations were predominantly either frameshifts (39/65) or single base substitutions (18/65), resulting in premature stop codons. Mutations that would predict abnormal RNA splicing were identified in seven cases. In one of the families, a nonconservative amino acid change was found to segregate with the disease. In spite of the large number of APC mutations reported to date, we identified 27 novel germline mutations in our patients, which reiterates the great heterogeneity of the mutation spectrum in FAP. In addition to the point mutations identified in our patients, structural rearrangements of APC were found in two pedigrees, by Southern blot analysis. The present study indicates that the combined use of DGGE, protein truncation test, and Southern blot analysis offers an efficient strategy for the presymptomatic diagnosis of FAP by direct mutation detection. We found that the combined use of the currently available molecular approaches still fails to identify the underlying genetic defect in a significant subset of the FAP families. The possible causes for this limitation are discussed.

10470088
The type of somatic mutation at APC in familial adenomatous polyposis is determined by the site of the germline mutation: a new facet to Knudson's 'two-hit' hypothesis
APC is often cited as a prime example of a tumor suppressor gene. Truncating germline and somatic mutations (or, infrequently, allelic loss) occur in tumors in FAP (familial adenomatous polyposis). Most sporadic colorectal cancers also have two APC mutations. Clues from attenuated polyposis, missense germline variants with mild disease and the somatic mutation cluster region (codons 1,250-1,450) indicate, however, that APC mutations might not result in simple loss of protein function. We have found that FAP patients with germline APC mutations within a small region (codons 1,194-1,392 at most) mainly show allelic loss in their colorectal adenomas, in contrast to other FAP patients, whose 'second hits' tend to occur by truncating mutations in the mutation cluster region. Our results indicate that different APC mutations provide cells with different selective advantages, with mutations close to codon 1,300 providing the greatest advantage. Allelic loss is selected strongly in cells with one mutation near codon 1,300. A different germline-somatic APC mutation association exists in FAP desmoids. APC is not, therefore, a classical tumor suppressor. Our findings also indicate a new mechanism for disease severity: if a broader spectrum of mutations is selected in tumors, the somatic mutation rate is effectively higher and more tumors grow.

12010888
Genetic and clinical characterisation of familial adenomatous polyposis: a population based study
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare autosomal dominantly inherited disease predisposing to colon cancer and caused by germline mutations in the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene.

10094547
Screening for mutations of the APC gene in 66 Italian familial adenomatous polyposis patients: evidence for phenotypic differences in cases with and without identified mutation
Germline mutations in the APC gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a dominantly inherited syndrome characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of polyps in the colon and in the rectum of affected individuals and by variable extracolonic manifestations (gastric and duodenal polyps, osteomas, retinal lesions, and desmoid tumors). Through the combined use of single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and the protein truncation test (PTT), we have screened 66 Italian FAP patients and found 29 different APC mutations in a total of 34 cases. Of the identified mutations, 15 were nonsense, 12 were 1- to 5-bp deletions or insertions and two were complex rearrangements, all leading to the formation of premature stop codons. Only 10 mutations had been already previously described at the germline level, confirming the high heterogeneity of the APC mutational spectrum. The mean age of diagnosis in mutation positive cases and their affected relatives was significantly lower than in cases without identified mutation (30.6 vs 39.1 years, respectively; p = 0.003). In addition, among patients without a family history of polyposis, all mutation-positive cases displayed at least one of the extracolonic manifestations usually associated with FAP, whereas in one-half of the cases without identified mutation, none of these phenotypes was observed. Although a fraction of apparently mutation-negative cases were likely to be due to limitations of the mutation screening strategy, our results suggest, in agreement with previous reports, that allelic and/or genetic heterogeneity might be responsible for the phenotypic variability observed in FAP patients.

34106356
APC germline variant analysis in the adenomatous polyposis phenotype in Japanese patients
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple colonic polyps, is caused by a germline pathogenic variant of the APC gene. However, this variant is not detected in up to 30% of patients with the adenomatous polyposis phenotype.

12007223
Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 71 Israeli families: 17 novel mutations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the APC gene. This study included 71 Israeli families referred for molecular analysis of the APC gene. Analysis was performed by the protein truncation test (PTT) of exon 15, and if negative, by direct sequencing of exon 1 to 14. Mutations were found in 36 (50.7%) probands. Mutation detection rates depended on the pattern of referral, such that among the 40 probands referred from the Service for Hereditary Cancer the mutation detection rate was 70%, whereas among the 31 probands referred by other gastroenterologists detection rate was significantly lower (25.8%). Of the 36 mutations detected, 21 were within exon 15, 13 within exons 1 to 14 and 2 were newly-described splicing mutations in introns 9 and 14. A relatively high proportion of the mutations was detected in exon 9 (6/36), five of them newly described. Altogether, we describe here 17 new mutations. Within the two major ethnic groups in Israel, patients of Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi origin, there was no significant differences in the mutation detection rate or the distribution of mutations within the APC gene. No founder mutation was detected in any of these populations. Our data confirm that higher detection rates may be expected in patients referred by clinical services specializing in hereditary colon cancer. These results further underscore the importance of complete analysis of all exons and exon/intron boundaries, in order to achieve maximal detection rate in patients suspected of FAP.

10923044
Eleven novel APC mutations identified in Portuguese FAP families
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer. In the present study we screened all of the exons of the APC gene in individuals belonging to 85 Portuguese FAP families. We here report eleven novel mutations which are predominantly frameshifts or single base substitutions, resulting in premature stop codons. Hum Mutat 16:178, 2000.

10646887
APC gene mutations and colorectal adenomatosis in familial adenomatous polyposis
Correlations between germline APC mutation sites and colorectal pathophenotypes, as evaluated by the direct count of adenomas at colectomy, were investigated analysing colectomy specimens from 29 FAP patients carrying one mis-sense (codon 208) and 14 frame-shift or non-sense APC mutations (codons 232, 367, 437, 623, 876, 995, 1061, 1068, 1075, 1112, 1114, 1309, 1324, 1556). The mis-sense mutation at codon 208 was associated with a relatively mild colorectal pathophenotype. The mutation at codon 367, subject to alternative splicing, was associated with attenuated FAP. The mutation at codon 1309 was associated with the profuse colorectal adenomatosis. For 13 mutations, predicted to result in null alleles or truncated APC proteins, we correlated density and distribution of colorectal adenomas with the predicted functional effects of the mutation. The most severe colorectal pathophenotype was significantly associated with the truncating mutation at codon 1309, which is located downstream to the I beta-catenin binding domain but upstream II beta-catenin-binding domain. Mutations between codons 867 and 1114, which affect the I beta-catenin binding domain, as well as mutations occurring in exons 6 and 9, predicted to result in null alleles, were associated with a less severe colorectal pathophenotype. Overall, the highest number of adenomas was detected in the right colon, followed by the left colon, transverse colon sigma and rectum. However, the highest density of adenomas was observed in the left colon, followed by the right colon, sigma, transverse colon and rectum. Colorectal carcinomas, observed in only five patients, were all in the left colon.

10982189
Genomic rearrangements of the APC tumor-suppressor gene in familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor-suppressor gene result in the hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Almost all APC mutations that have been identified are single-nucleotide alterations, small insertions, or small deletions that would truncate the protein product of the gene. No well-characterized intragenic rearrangement of APC has been described, and the prevalence of this type of mutation in FAP patients is not clear. We screened 49 potential FAP families and identified 26 different germline APC mutations in 30 families. Four of these mutations were genomic rearrangements resulting from homologous and nonhomologous recombinations mediated by Alu elements. Two of these four rearrangements were complex, involving deletion and insertion of nucleotides. Of these four rearrangements, one resulted in the deletion of exons 11 and 12 and two others resulted in either complete or partial deletion of exon 14. The fourth rearrangement grossly altered the sequence within intron 14. Although this rearrangement did not affect any coding sequence of APC at the genomic DNA level, it caused inappropriate splicing of exon 14. These rearrangements were initially revealed by analyzing cDNAs and could not have been identified by using mutation detection methods that screened each exon individually. The identification of a rearrangement that did not alter any coding exons yet affected the splicing further underscores the importance of using cDNA for mutation analysis. The identification of four genomic rearrangements among 30 mutations suggests that genomic rearrangements are frequent germline APC mutations.

23159591
APC germline mutations in individuals being evaluated for familial adenomatous polyposis: a review of the Mayo Clinic experience with 1591 consecutive tests
Inactivating APC mutations cause familial adenomatous polyposis, classically characterized by hundreds to thousands of adenomatous colorectal polyps and cancer. Historically, 98% of pathogenic alterations in APC are nonsense or frameshift mutations; however, few reported series have used techniques that test for large deletions or duplications. Splice site mutations are only rarely documented. Consecutive cases (n = 1591) submitted for complete APC gene analysis during a 4-year period were reviewed. Testing included mutation screening (Sanger sequencing or conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis and protein truncation testing) with reflex confirmation sequencing. Gene deletion or duplication analysis was performed in 1421 cases by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Testing yielded 411 pathogenic, 20 likely pathogenic, 15 variant of uncertain significance, 140 likely benign, and 1005 negative reports. Identified were 168 novel variants (103 pathogenic, 5 likely pathogenic, 12 variant of uncertain significance, and 48 likely benign). Of the 431 pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations, frameshift, nonsense, splice site, and large deletion or duplication mutations represented 43%, 42%, 9%, and 6% of cases, respectively. This is the largest report of clinical APC testing experience with concurrent multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. In addition to nonsense and frameshift mutations, large deletions or duplications and canonical splice site mutations are a significant cause of familial adenomatous polyposis. Despite technological advances, broad allelic, locus, and phenotypic heterogeneity continue to pose challenges for genetic testing of patients with colorectal adenomatous polyposis.

1316610
Germ-line mutations of the APC gene in 53 familial adenomatous polyposis patients
We searched for germ-line mutations of the APC gene in 79 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis using a ribonuclease protection analysis coupled with polymerase chain reaction amplifications of genomic DNA. Mutations were found in 53 patients (67%); 28 of the mutations were small deletions and 2 were 1- to 2-base-pair insertions; 19 were point mutations resulting in stop codons and only 4 were missense point mutations. Thus, 92% of the mutations were predicted to result in truncations of the APC protein. More than two-thirds (68%) of the mutations were clustered in the 5' half of the last exon, and nearly two-fifths of the total mutations occurred at one of five positions. This information has significant implications for understanding the role of APC mutation in inherited forms of colorectal neoplasia and for designing effective methods for genetic counseling and presymptomatic diagnosis.

12527714
Germline APC mutation on the beta-catenin binding site is associated with a decreased apoptotic level in colorectal adenomas
Germline mutations in APC tumor suppressor gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). A major role of these genetic changes is the constitutive activation of beta-catenin-Tcf-4 mediated transcription of nuclear target genes, but other cellular functions can be misregulated. To assess how different APC mutations can drive the early steps of colonic tumorigenesis, we studied the effect of 10 different germline-truncating alterations on the phenotype of the corresponding adenomas. A significant reduction of apoptosis, uncoupled with an increased c-myc and cyclin-D1 expression, was seen with a frameshift mutation on codon 1383, in the 20-aa repeats of the beta-catenin degradation domain, independent of a somatic alteration on the wild-type allele. The decreased apoptotic level was associated with a higher incidence of cancerization. No other APC mutation was linked with a similar effect, even in presence of a somatic allelic loss. These findings suggest that mutations in critical sites of the beta-catenin degradation domain of APC gene can convey a selective advantage to the colonic neoplastic clones by altering the apoptotic surveillance rather than enhancing the beta-catenin-Tcf-4 transcription of growth-promoting genes.

30897307
Genotype-phenotype correlation in 99 familial adenomatous polyposis patients: A prospective prevention protocol
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a syndrome caused by germline pathogenic variants in the tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). Identification of APC pathogenic variants sites and the genotype-phenotype correlation are important for characterizing, monitoring, and treating members of affected families. The aim of this study was to correlate genotype-phenotype of Brazilian individuals carrying APC pathogenic germline variants and that have FAP.

7853377
APC mutation associated with late onset of familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder. Mutation studies in the corresponding gene (APC) may provide information for predictive tests for persons at risk in affected families. We report here a new mutation in exon 6 (codon 233) of the APC gene and clinical data in a large family with late onset of the disease in most affected persons.

23599153
Oxidative DNA damage drives carcinogenesis in MUTYH-associated-polyposis by specific mutations of mitochondrial and MAPK genes
MUTYH is a DNA-base-excision-repair gene implicated in the activation of nuclear and mitochondrial cell-death pathways. MUTYH germline mutations cause an inherited polyposis, MUTYH-associated-polyposis, characterized by multiple adenomas and increased susceptibility to colorectal cancer. Since this carcinogenesis remains partially unknown, we searched for nuclear and mitochondrial gene alterations that may drive the tumorigenic process. Ninety-six adenomas and 7 carcinomas from 12 MUTYH-associated-polyposis and 13 classical/attenuated adenomatous polyposis patients were investigated by sequencing and pyrosequencing for the presence of mutations in KRAS, BRAF, MT-CO1/MT-CO2 and MT-TD genes. KRAS mutations were identified in 24% MUTYH-associated-polyposis vs 15% classical/attenuated familial polyposis adenomas; mutated MUTYH-associated-polyposis adenomas exhibited only c.34G>T transversions in codon 12, an alteration typically associated with oxidative DNA damage, or mutations in codon 13; neither of these mutations was found in classical/attenuated familial polyposis adenomas (P<0.001). Mutated MUTYH-associated-polyposis carcinomas showed KRAS c.34G>T transversions, prevalently occurring with BRAFV600E; none of the classical/attenuated familial polyposis carcinomas displayed these alterations. Comparing mitochondrial DNA from lymphocytes and adenomas of the same individuals, we detected variants in 82% MUTYH-associated-polyposis vs 38% classical/attenuated familial polyposis patients (P=0.040). MT-CO1/MT-CO2 missense mutations, which cause aminoacid changes, were only found in MUTYH-associated-polyposis lesions and were significantly associated with KRAS mutations (P=0.0085). We provide evidence that MUTYH-associated-polyposis carcinogenesis is characterized by the occurrence of specific mutations in both KRAS and phylogenetically conserved genes of mitochondrial DNA which are involved in controlling oxidative phosphorylation; this implies the existence of a colorectal tumorigenesis in which changes in mitochondrial functions cooperate with RAS-induced malignant transformation.

15108286
Mutation analysis of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in Danish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Development of one hundred or more adenomas in the colon and rectum is diagnostic for the dominantly inherited, autosomal disease Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). It is possible to identify a mutation in the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene in approximately 80% of the patients, and almost 1,000 different pathogenic mutations have been identified in the APC gene up till now. We report 12 novel and 24' previously described germline APC mutations from 48 unrelated Danish families. Four families with the mutation localized in the 3' region of the gene showed great variance in phenotypic presentation.

15300853
Identification of APC gene mutations in colorectal cancer using universal microarray-based combinatorial sequencing-by-hybridization
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited form of colorectal cancer, caused mostly by mutations in the APC gene. Due to the wide variety of mutations found and the large size of the APC gene, several methods of mutation detection are used, which can be time consuming and costly. Here we demonstrate a new method of mutation detection in the APC gene using an array-based approach termed combinatorial sequencing-by-hybridization (cSBH). In cSBH, a universal probe set is attached to a support and a second one is in solution. Two-probe ligation occurs when a DNA strand from the target PCR product consecutively anneals to both unlabeled array-bound and solution-phase dye-labeled probe, creating all target-complementary long-labeled probes attached to the surface. A standard array reader scores fluorescent signals at each array position. Cell lines and patient DNA with known APC gene mutations were analyzed using a cSBH-based HyChip trade mark product. Results show that this universal hexamer (6-mer) chip can successfully detect a range of mutations. Results are very robust for a continuous readout of 3.6 kb from a PCR target, with 99.97% accuracy on a single HyChip trade mark slide. cSBH is a fast, cost-efficient method for first stage mutation screening in the APC or any other gene.

26446593
Contribution of APC and MUTYH mutations to familial adenomatous polyposis susceptibility in Hungary
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome with considerable genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, defined by the development of multiple adenomas throughout the colorectum. FAP is caused either by monoallelic mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene APC, or by biallelic germline mutations of MUTYH, this latter usually presenting with milder phenotype. The aim of the present study was to characterize the genotype and phenotype of Hungarian FAP patients. Mutation screening of 87 unrelated probands from FAP families (21 of them presented as the attenuated variant of the disease, showing <100 polyps) was performed using DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Twenty-four different pathogenic mutations in APC were identified in 65 patients (75 %), including nine cases (37.5 %) with large genomic alterations. Twelve of the point mutations were novel. In addition, APC-negative samples were also tested for MUTYH mutations and we were able to identify biallelic pathogenic mutations in 23 % of these cases (5/22). Correlations between the localization of APC mutations and the clinical manifestations of the disease were observed, cases with a mutation in the codon 1200-1400 region showing earlier age of disease onset (p < 0.003). There were only a few, but definitive dissimilarities between APC- and MUTYH-associated FAP in our cohort: the age at onset of polyposis was significantly delayed for biallelic MUTYH mutation carriers as compared to patients with an APC mutation. Our data represent the first comprehensive study delineating the mutation spectra of both APC and MUTYH in Hungarian FAP families, and underscore the overlap between the clinical characteristics of APC- and MUTYH-associated phenotypes, necessitating a more appropriate clinical characterization of FAP families.

7833936
Eleven novel germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene


7959691
Genotype-phenotype correlation between position of constitutional APC gene mutation and CHRPE expression in familial adenomatous polyposis
Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for the disease familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer. The most common extra-colonic manifestation is congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE), expressed in up to 90% of FAP kindreds. Chain-terminating APC mutations were characterised in 26 unrelated FAP patients. Results show that CHRPE expression is determined by the length of truncated protein product. CHRPE is therefore the first extracolonic manifestation of FAP to be shown to be under the control of the APC mutation site and should facilitate the detection of constitutional APC mutations in FAP kindreds.

8118461
Exon eight APC mutations account for a disproportionate number of familial adenomatous polyposis families
The familial adenomatous polyposis gene, APC, has recently been identified. Detection of APC mutations will facilitate genetic screening in family members at risk for this disease. The length of APC makes it impractical to examine the entire coding sequence in each new family encountered. Identification of mutation cluster regions within the gene has therefore become a priority. Initial reports suggested that exon eight might contain a disproportionate number of mutations. This study describes direct sequencing of exon eight in 21 unrelated Australians with familial adenomatous polyposis. Mutations were detected in three of the 21 subjects (14%). Two were previously described point mutations changing an arginine to a stop codon. The third was a novel two base-pair deletion producing a frameshift and downstream stop codon. All three mutations segregated with the disease gene in their respective families. Three at risk children from two of these families were studied and shown not to have inherited the disease producing mutation. These results confirm that exon eight is a frequent site of mutation in familial adenomatous polyposis and should be examined routinely in families requesting genetic screening.

1651563
Mutations of chromosome 5q21 genes in FAP and colorectal cancer patients
Previous studies suggested that one or more genes on chromosome 5q21 are responsible for the inheritance of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Gardner's syndrome (GS), and contribute to tumor development in patients with noninherited forms of colorectal cancer. Two genes on 5q21 that are tightly linked to FAP (MCC and APC) were found to be somatically altered in tumors from sporadic colorectal cancer patients. One of the genes (APC) was also found to be altered by point mutation in the germ line of FAP and GS patients. These data suggest that more than one gene on chromosome 5q21 may contribute to colorectal neoplasia, and that mutations of the APC gene can cause both FAP and GS. The identification of these genes should aid in understanding the pathogenesis of colorectal neoplasia and in the diagnosis and counseling of patients with inherited predispositions to colorectal cancer.

1338764
Screening for germ-line mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis patients: 61 new patients and a summary of 150 unrelated patients
We report here the result of a screening for germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in 61 new familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients as well as a summary of the results of 150 patients. Examination of the entire coding region of the APC gene, based on a ribonuclease protection assay coupled with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), disclosed mutations that were considered to cause significant defects in the APC product in 97 of 150 unrelated FAP patients. Our findings revealed the following characteristics of the germ-line mutations of APC: 1) the great majority of the mutations were found to truncate the APC product; 2) almost all of the mutations were located within the first half of the coding region; 3) no correlation was observed between the locations of germ-line mutations and extracolonic manifestations in FAP patients; 4) more than 80% of base substitutions in the APC gene were from cytosine to other nucleotides, nearly one-third of which occurred at the GpG site. Our results provide information helpful to an understanding of the APC gene and will also contribute to presymptomatic diagnosis of members in FAP families.

15024739
Molecular analysis of the APC and MYH genes in Czech families affected by FAP or multiple adenomas: 13 novel mutations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer and is caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. The most prominent clinical manifestation is the presence of hundreds to thousands of colorectal polyps. A milder phenotype is found in patients affected with AFAP/ multiple adenomas. We screened the entire APC coding region using the combination of DGGE, PTT and direct sequencing and identified causative mutations in 52 of 77 patients. Thirteen of the mutations found were novel. In addition, we also tested 21 APC mutation/negative probands for the two most common mutations in the MYH gene. Four patients showed neither dominant transmission of the disease nor evidence of APC mutations. In one of them the most common biallelic germline mutation in the MYH gene was detected. Correlations between the localization of germline mutations and clinical manifestations of the diseases are discussed.

10077047
Combined molecular and clinical approaches for the identification of families with familial adenomatous polyposis coli
Objective:
        
      
      Using an interdisciplinary clinical and molecular approach, the authors identified APC germline mutations in families with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Correlation of mutation site with disease manifestation and the impact of molecular data on clinical proceedings were examined.

33468868
[A Family of Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis]
The proband was a 49-year-old woman who had undergone total colectomy, ileorectostomy, and bilateral ovariectomy for the treatment of cecal(T3N0)and sigmoid colon(T4a, N2b, M1c2[Ova], Stage Ⅳc)cancers. Pathological findings revealed 6 adenomas and 2 adenocarcinoma-in-adenomas in the right colon, other than advanced colon cancers. She had a family history of colorectal cancer meeting the Amsterdam Criteria I, but none of her relatives had definite polyposis. Considering the possibility of Lynch syndrome, the microsatellite-instability test and immunohistochemistry(IHC)examination of the mismatch repair protein were performed, leading to the results of microsatellite stable and proficient mismatch repair protein expression. Therefore, we performed the multigene panel test containing 26 genes using the next-generation sequencing technology. In the APC(5q22.2)gene, a pathogenic variant(exon 12 c.994C>T/p.Arg332*)was identified, leading to a diagnosis of attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis(AFAP). After disclosure of the results to the proband, the single-site variant analysis was performed on her 3 daughters. In her second and third daughters, the same variant was confirmed, and laparoscopic total colectomy was performed 23 and 35 months after the disclosure of the genetic analysis results, respectively. Currently, we are conducting periodical surveillance for the residual rectum.

15122587
Definition of candidate low risk APC alleles in a Swedish population
Many families experience an apparently inherited increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) similar to the known syndromes familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). Besides these high-risk syndromes, approximately 10% of all CRC cases come from families with 2 affected 1st-degree relatives, and even 1st-degree relatives to a single case of CRC are at increased risk. Risk subjects from these families frequently show polyps at colonoscopy, which suggests the APC gene as a good candidate susceptibility gene for these attenuated polypotic syndromes. We used the sensitive DHPLC technique to search for possible predisposing germline mutations in the entire APC gene in 91 risk subjects from these high- and low-risk syndromes with unknown predisposing genes. Most exons were also screened for mutations in 96 normal controls and 96 colorectal cancer cases. In our study we probably have identified the most common APC variants in a Swedish population. Among 30 germline variants identified, 1 clearly pathogenic nonsense mutation and 11 putative pathogenic variants (10 missense and one 3' UTR) were found in 20 index patients (22%). Twelve silent as well as 5 intronic variants were considered nonpathogenic. Two of the missense variants found here, E1317Q and D1822V, have previously been related to a difference in risk of colorectal cancer. One variant, 8636C>A, located within the 3' UTR region of the APC gene, was suggested to constitute an additional low risk allele with a similar relative risk as the Jewish I1307K mutation (OR = 1.8; 95% CI, 0.96-3.40). The question of whether all the other variants confer an increased colorectal cancer risk warrants future large association studies.

11754114
Maternal mosaicism for a second mutational event--a novel deletion--in a familial adenomatous polyposis family harboring a new germ-line mutation in the alternatively spliced-exon 9 region of APC
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant heritable disorder caused by germ-line mutations in the APC gene. To date, more than 300 germ-line mutations within this gene have been described. Using PCR, SSCP and DNA sequencing, we have identified a new mutation in the alternatively spliced region of exon 9 (1042C-->T), which results in a stop signal. This mutation manifested an aggressive form of FAP with onset of symptoms in one proband at age 17. Our results differ from reported exon 9 mutations in the spliced-out portion of the gene manifesting an attentuated form of FAP (AAPC) [Varesco et al 1994; van der Luijt et al. 1995; Curia et al. 1998; Young et al. 1998]. When analyzing this family, we encountered a mutant FAP gene which had undergone a second mutational event, a deletion. In addition to linkage analysis, both the occurrence of the two exon 9 mutation-carrier siblings, of which one is affected, harboring the same novel deletion in one generation of this family, and its absence in both parents indicates the existence of maternal germ-line mosaicism for cells bearing the latter second mutational event. Our study is only the second report of parental mosaicism in the APC gene.

29251405
Germline APC mutations in hepatoblastoma
Background:
        
      
      Conflicting reports on the frequency of germline adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations in patients with hepatoblastoma (HB) have called into question the clinical value of APC mutation testing on apparently sporadic HB.

25604157
High-resolution melting (HRM) re-analysis of a polyposis patients cohort reveals previously undetected heterozygous and mosaic APC gene mutations
Familial adenomatous polyposis is most frequently caused by pathogenic variants in either the APC gene or the MUTYH gene. The detection rate of pathogenic variants depends on the severity of the phenotype and sensitivity of the screening method, including sensitivity for mosaic variants. For 171 patients with multiple colorectal polyps without previously detectable pathogenic variant, APC was reanalyzed in leukocyte DNA by one uniform technique: high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis. Serial dilution of heterozygous DNA resulted in a lowest detectable allelic fraction of 6% for the majority of variants. HRM analysis and subsequent sequencing detected pathogenic fully heterozygous APC variants in 10 (6%) of the patients and pathogenic mosaic variants in 2 (1%). All these variants were previously missed by various conventional scanning methods. In parallel, HRM APC scanning was applied to DNA isolated from polyp tissue of two additional patients with apparently sporadic polyposis and without detectable pathogenic APC variant in leukocyte DNA. In both patients a pathogenic mosaic APC variant was present in multiple polyps. The detection of pathogenic APC variants in 7% of the patients, including mosaics, illustrates the usefulness of a complete APC gene reanalysis of previously tested patients, by a supplementary scanning method. HRM is a sensitive and fast pre-screening method for reliable detection of heterozygous and mosaic variants, which can be applied to leukocyte and polyp derived DNA.

15986289
[A case of attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis coli (AFAP)]
We describe an asymptomatic female patient who was diagnosed with multiple tubular and tubulovillous adenomas in the right-sided colon on routine colonoscopy at the age of 59 years. Genetic testing identified a germline truncating mutation at codon 405 (R405X) of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. This mutation is located in the alternatively spliced region of exon 9, a region that is associated with an attenuated phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP). To our knowledge this report describes for the first time the R405X germline mutation in association with AFAP. Our patient had no extracolonic manifestations of AFAP. Treatment consisted of a right hemicolectomy with ileotransversal anastomosis plus complete endoscopic polypectomy in the left-sided colon. AFAP is a poorly defined condition with unknown prevalence and penetrance that requires individual therapy and life-long surveillance. Because of marked intrafamilial phenotypic variance, it is crucial to identify these patients and implement proper endoscopic surveillance at an early age in family members carrying this mutation.

20033787
A distinct mutation on the alternative splice site of APC exon 9 results in attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis phenotype
A subset of APC mutation carriers shows a milder familial adenomatous polyposis phenotype (attenuated FAP) developing smaller number of polyps and colorectal cancer at an older age. It seems that a different mechanism to carcinogenesis is initiated according to the initial site of the germline mutation. The APC gene of a female patient with AFAP phenotypic features was analysed. A novel mutation located on the alternatively splice site of exon 9 was identified. This is the first reported mutation in the specific site. Transcripts characterization revealed disruption of splicing occurring within exon 9, resulting in the expression of a shorter mRNA transcript, which surprisingly does not affect the ratio between the two wild type transcripts, as well as the production of wild type short isoform by the mutant allele. The short wild type isoform, produced by the mutant allele, needs to be inactivated, on top of the wild type allele, for colorectal cancer to develop. These observations enhance the 'three hit hypothesis' and indicate that a distinct mechanism for the adenoma to carcinoma sequence should be followed, for truncated mutations taking place on the borderline of the alternatively spliced exon 9 of the APC gene, as well.

14633595
Reconstructed beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling in yeast applicable to functional evaluation of APC mutations
In human genetics and molecular oncology, mutation research is necessary not only to identify mutations in nucleic acid sequences, but also to analyze the loss of function caused by mutant proteins. We reconstructed a protein-protein network system of human beta-catenin and TCF4, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. beta-Catenin and TCF4 proteins form a complex and transactivate reporter genes. Co-expressed wild-type APC with beta-catenin and TCF4 inhibit the transcriptional activity of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in yeast, as well as in mammals. This unique method in which the beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling pathway is reconstructed in vivo may prove useful for the functional evaluation of APC mutants, including a type of APC truncated and missense mutants influenced to the ability of binding to beta-catenin.

20924072
Clinical and genetic characterization of classical forms of familial adenomatous polyposis: a Spanish population study
Background:
        
      
      Classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is characterized by the appearance of >100 colorectal adenomas.

11247896
Can APC mutation analysis contribute to therapeutic decisions in familial adenomatous polyposis? Experience from 680 FAP families
Background and aims:
        
      
      In familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), correlations between site of mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and severity of colonic polyposis or extracolonic manifestations are well known. While mutation analysis is important for predictive diagnosis in persons at risk, its relevance for clinical management of individual patients is open to question.

20333795
APC gene mutations in Chinese familial adenomatous polyposis patients
Aim:
        
      
      To study the characteristics of APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene germline mutation in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).

19793053
APC or MUTYH mutations account for the majority of clinically well-characterized families with FAP and AFAP phenotype and patients with more than 30 adenomas
Patients presenting familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) or multiple colorectal adenomas (MCRAs) phenotype are clinically difficult to distinguish. We aimed to genetically characterize 107 clinically well-characterized patients with FAP-like phenotype, and stratified according to the recent guidelines for the clinical management of FAP: FAP, AFAP, MCRA (10-99 colorectal adenomas) without family history of colorectal cancer or few adenomas (FH), MCRA (10-99) with FH, MCRA (3-9) with FH. Overall, APC or MUTYH mutations were detected in 42/48 (88%), 14/20 (70%) and 10/38 (26%) of FAP, AFAP and MCRA patients, respectively. APC and MUTYH mutations accounted for 81% and 7% of FAP patients and for 30% and 40% of AFAP patients, respectively. Notably, MCRA patients did not present APC mutations. In 26% of these patients, an MUTYH mutation was identified and the detection rate increased with the number of adenomas, irrespectively of family history, being significantly higher in MCRA patients presenting more than 30 adenomas [7/12 (58%) vs 2/14 (14%), p = 0.023]. We validate the recently proposed guidelines in our patient's cohort and show that APC or MUTYH germline defects are responsible for the majority of clinically well-characterized patients with FAP and AFAP phenotype, and patients with more than 30 colorectal adenomas. The different mutation frequencies according to family history and to the number of adenomas underscore the importance of an adequate familial characterization, both clinically and by colonoscopy, in the management of FAP-like phenotypes. The phenotypes of the mutation-negative patients suggest distinct etiologies in these cases.

31504825
Medulloblastomas associated with an APC germline pathogenic variant share the good prognosis of CTNNB1-mutated medulloblastomas
Background:
        
      
      Medulloblastomas may occur in a predisposition context, including familial adenomatosis polyposis. Medulloblastomas related to a germline pathogenic variant of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) remain rare and poorly described. Their similarities with sporadic WNT medulloblastomas still require description.

10347554
Seven novel mutations in the APC gene of Portuguese families with familial adenomatous polyposis: correlation with phenotype
Germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). In the present study, we have used the protein truncation test to screen for mutations in exon 15 and exons 1-14 of the APC gene and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis to analyze exons 1-14. We have studied nine unrelated FAP kindreds, eight with the classical phenotype and one with an atypical phenotype, with several family members exhibiting fewer than 50 colonic polyps. The combined use of these two methodologies allowed the identification of seven novel mutations, with two unrelated families sharing the same mutation. All mutations were chain terminating: six resulted from small deletions, one from a small insertion, and one was a point mutation, resulting in a premature stop codon. Seven mutations were located in exon 15 of the APC gene, one was in exon 10, and the remaining one, which corresponded to the kindred with an atypical phenotype, was located in exon 4.

20223039
Familial adenomatous polyposis: experience from a study of 1164 unrelated german polyposis patients
The autosomal-dominant precancerous condition familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene APC. Consistent correlations between the site of mutations in the gene and clinical phenotype have been published for different patient groups. We report our experiences of APC mutation analysis and genotype-phenotype correlations in 1166 unrelated polyposis families and discuss our results in the light of literature data. We show that the mutation detection rates largely depend on the family history and clinical course of the disease. We present a list of 315 different point mutations and 37 large deletions detected in 634 of the 1166 index patients. Our results confirm previously published genotype-phenotype correlations with respect to the colorectal phenotype and extracolonic manifestations. However, 'exceptions to the rule' are also observed, and possible explanations for this are discussed. The discovery of autosomal-recessive MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) as a differential diagnosis to FAP implies that some results have to be reinterpreted and surveillance guidelines in the families have to be reevaluated.

27158207
Clinicopathological features of familial adenomatous polyposis in Korean patients
Aim:
        
      
      To identify prognostic factors and to correlate APC mutations with clinical features, including extracolic manifestations.

33769591
Mutational screening through comprehensive bioinformatics analysis to detect novel germline mutations in the APC gene in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as a colon cancer predisposition syndrome is an autosomal-dominant inherited condition and is diagnosed by the progress of hundreds or thousands of adenomatous colonic polyps in the colon. This study aims at the nature and effect of Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene mutations in FAP tumorigenesis.

19531215
Molecular analysis of the APC and MUTYH genes in Galician and Catalonian FAP families: a different spectrum of mutations?
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant-inherited colorectal cancer syndrome, caused by germline mutations in the APC gene. Recently, biallelic mutations in MUTYH have also been identified in patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and in APC-negative patients with FAP. The aim of this work is therefore to determine the frequency of APC and MUTYH mutations among FAP families from two Spanish populations.

9341879
Novel germline mutations in the APC gene and their phenotypic spectrum in familial adenomatous polyposis kindreds
Among 23 germline mutations identified in the APC screening of 45 familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients, we have found 10 different novel frameshift mutations in 11 apparently unrelated patients. In two cases, an additional missense mutation was detected. One previously described as a causative germline mutation (S2621C), associated with a 1-bp insertion (4684insA) on the opposite allele, did not segregate with the FAP phenotype in the family and was therefore considered as being non-pathogenic. The other (Z1625H) was located 2 codons before a 1-bp deletion (4897delC). Both mutations were transmitted together from an FAP father to his affected son. The FAP phenotype of these 10 novel truncating mutations was clinically documented within their kindreds. Important variability was observed in the phenotype. Interestingly, we noted that a mutation (487insT) localized at the boundary of the 5' attenuated APC phenotype region in two unrelated families resulted in classical polyposis. A clear-cut genotype-phenotype correlation could be drawn in only two instances. In one family, a 4684insA mutation led to a mild polyposis associated with early inherited osteomas and, in the family bearing the double mutation (Z1625H + 4897delC), the phenotype was obviously a 3' attenuated type. Our data illustrate the wide genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of this condition between and within the families, making the establishment of correlations complex and any prediction in this disease difficult, although targeting the mutation site may be helpful in some specific cases.

19029688
APC gene mutations causing familial adenomatous polyposis in Polish patients
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a well-known hereditary condition characterised by alimentary system tumours. Tens to thousands of polyps occur in the colon and rectum of the patients. There is a high heterogeneity with regard to the number and time of the occurrence of polyps. The occurrence of FAP is associated with mutations in the APC tumour suppressor gene, which was described in 1991. Since then, many studies have been done to analyse the distribution of mutations in individual populations and to determine the function of the gene and a diagnostic approach to FAP. Here the APC gene was studied with respect to the occurrence of small mutations and large rearrangements in 300 unrelated Polish FAP families. Ninety-seven mutations were identified in 164 families. Out of these mutations, 80 were small mutations, including 58 small mutations that were first identified in the Polish population (42 novel and 16 described previously). An increased frequency of mutation c.3927_3931delAAAGA was observed in 10% of the Polish group. Seventeen large rearrangements were found in 29 families. Out of those rearrangements, 8 repeat rearrangements occurred in 20 families. A problem in fast molecular diagnostics of FAP is a high heterogeneity of mutations in the APC gene. It seems that a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification test and searching for small mutations by the use of screening methods at the 5' end of exon 15 and exons 14, 9, 11, 13, 5, and 3, help to improve the molecular diagnostics of FAP in Polish patients.

15108288
First genotype characterization of Argentinean FAP patients: identification of 14 novel APC mutations
We examined the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene for disease-causing mutations in 51 unrelated Argentinean probands affected by familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Using a combination of the protein truncation test, the single strand conformation polymorphism technique, DNA sequencing and quantitative PCR analysis, we identified the specific mutation in 39 (average age: 28.4 years) of the 51 probands (detection rate: 76.47%); 13 are novel germline mutations and one is a novel sequence variant. There were 27 small deletions, four small duplications, five nonsense mutations in exon 15, three nonsense mutations in exons 6, 11, and 12, and one sequence variant in exon 3 identified in a patient bearing a truncating mutation in exon 15. The most common mutation (found in 10 cases) was at codon 1309. All patients negative for APC mutations were also negative for the MutY homolog (MYH) gene mutation, as expected because of fully penetrant FAP cases. This study enlarges the spectrum of APC gene mutations, and reinforces the concept of mutation heterogeneity. It also sheds light on correlations between the site of APC germline mutations and the clinical manifestations of FAP. Our data indicate that the genotype/phenotype correlations in Argentinean patients are similar to those observed in other populations.

19725996
Recurrent APC gene mutations in Polish FAP families
The molecular diagnostics of genetically conditioned disorders is based on the identification of the mutations in the predisposing genes. Hereditary cancer disorders of the gastrointestinal tracts are caused by mutations of the tumour suppressor genes or the DNA repair genes. Occurrence of recurrent mutation allows improvement of molecular diagnostics. The mutation spectrum in the genes causing hereditary forms of colorectal cancers in the Polish population was previously described. In the present work an estimation of the frequency of the recurrent mutations of the APC gene was performed. Eight types of mutations occurred in 19.4% of our FAP families and these constitute 43% of all Polish diagnosed families.

1651174
Identification and characterization of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene
DNA from 61 unrelated patients with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) was examined for mutations in three genes (DP1, SRP19, and DP2.5) located within a 100 kb region deleted in two of the patients. The intron-exon boundary sequences were defined for each of these genes, and single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of exons from DP2.5 identified four mutations specific to APC patients. Each of two aberrant alleles contained a base substitution changing an amino acid to a stop codon in the predicted peptide; the other mutations were small deletions leading to frameshifts. Analysis of DNA from parents of one of these patients showed that his 2 bp deletion is a new mutation; furthermore, the mutation was transmitted to two of his children. These data have established that DP2.5 is the APC gene.

15459959
Familial adenomatous polyposis: aberrant splicing due to missense or silent mutations in the APC gene
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene APC. To date, the relevance of rare exonic single-base substitutions at nucleotide positions close to splice sites that are predicted to result in missense or silent (SNP) variants or substitutions in introns at splice-site positions that are not highly conserved has not been systematically examined in FAP patients. In 34 index patients, we identified 26 different heterozygous single-base substitutions at or close to the splice sites. We characterized five exonic mutations in exon 4 (c.423G>T), exon 14 (c.1956C>T, c.1957A>G, and c.1957A>C), and exon 15 (c.1959G>A) by transcript analysis and by splice-prediction programs (BDGP, SpliceSiteFinder, and ESEfinder). The splicing patterns of these variants were compared to those of 16 different substitutions at highly or less-conserved intronic splice-site positions, and to normal controls. In addition, we analyzed cosegregation of the variants with affected family members and examined the genotype-phenotype correlation. We could demonstrate that the four unclear variants in exon 4 and 14 that are predicted to result in missense or silent mutations in fact lead to complete exon skipping due to aberrant splicing; one possible explanation for this observed effect might be the disruption of exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) motifs. In contrast, the substitution at the first position of exon 15 seems to actually be a silent variant. We present the first systematic evaluation of different single-base substitutions in APC at or close to splice sites at transcript level. We show that the consequence of exonic mutations cannot be evaluated only by the predicted change in amino acid sequence but rather by the change at DNA level. The functional analysis of variants with unknown pathogenic effect plays an important role in increasing the mutation detection rate and achieving validation of predictive testing.

31486992
Whole exome sequencing in familial isolated primary hyperparathyroidism
Purpose:
        
      
      Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP) is a rare inherited disease accounting for 1% of all cases of primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). It is genetically heterogeneous being associated with mutations in different genes, including MEN1, CDC73, CASR, and recently GCM2. The aim of the study was to further investigate the molecular pathogenesis in Italian FIHP kindreds.

1324223
Eight novel inactivating germ line mutations at the APC gene identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited condition predisposing to colorectal cancer. The recent isolation of the responsible gene (adenomatous polyposis coli or APC) has facilitated the search for germ line mutations in affected individuals. Previous authors have used the RNase protection assay and the single-strand conformation polymorphisms procedure to screen for mutations. In this study we used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). DGGE analysis of 10 APC exons (4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, and part of 15) in 33 unrelated Dutch FAP patients has led to the identification of eight novel germ line mutations resulting in stop codons or frameshifts. The results reported here indicate that (1) familial adenomatous polyposis is caused by an extremely heterogeneous spectrum of point mutations; (2) all the mutations found in this study are chain terminating; and (3) DGGE represents a rapid and sensitive technique for the detection of mutations in the unusually large APC gene. An extension of the DGGE analysis to the entire coding region in a sufficient number of clinically well-characterized, unrelated patients will facilitate the establishment of genotype-phenotype correlations. On the other hand, the occurrence of an extremely heterogeneous spectrum of mutations spread throughout the entire length of the large APC gene among the FAP patients indicates that this approach may not be useful as a rapid presymptomatic diagnostic procedure in a routine laboratory. Nevertheless, the above DGGE approach has incidentally led to the identification of a common polymorphism in exon 13. Such intragenic polymorphisms offer a practical approach to a more rapid procedure for presymptomatic diagnosis of FAP by linkage analysis in informative families.

21110124
Mutation analysis of the APC gene in unrelated Korean patients with FAP: four novel mutations with unusual phenotype
Germline mutations within the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for most cases of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer. To date more than 900 different APC germline mutations have been characterized worldwide demonstrating allelic heterogeneity. Here, we analyzed the APC gene in 23 DNA samples from unrelated Korean patients with the typical clinical symptoms of FAP by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. We identified 20 different APC sequence variants, including 9 truncating mutations, 1 missense mutation, 7 polymorphisms, and 3 intronic variants. Nine different truncating mutations, including four novel mutations (p.Leu180TyrfsX5, p.Gly567X, p.Ser1275PhefsX13, p.Leu1280CysfsX8), were detected. The most common mutation was a 5 bp deletion at codon 1,309 (p.Glu1309AspfsX4) as in Western studies. The next most common mutation was p.Ser1275PhefsX13 with a severe form of FAP with many extracolonic manifestations; this was a novel mutation identified in our study and may represent the second hot-spot mutation in a Korean population. Novel mutations are of particular interest because of the unusual phenotypic features shown by patients. In present study, we found new positions associated with thyroid cancer (codon 180) and desmoid tumor (codon 1,280), which have not been previously reported. The results of this molecular study have revealed the existence of novel pathogenic mutations in Korean patients with FAP. In addition to allowing phenotype-genotype correlations to be performed, these results are currently being used in genetic counseling and in patient care.

20434453
Allele-specific expression of APC in adenomatous polyposis families
Background & aims:
        
      
      Germline mutations in the APC gene cause of most cases of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and a lesser proportion of attenuated FAP (AFAP). Systematic analysis of APC at the RNA level could provide insight into the pathogenicity of identified mutations and the molecular basis of FAP/AFAP in families without identifiable mutations. Here, we analyzed the prevalence of imbalances in the allelic expression of APC in polyposis families with germline mutations in the gene and without detectable mutations in APC and/or MUTYH.

12702169
Detection of five new mutations in the APC gene using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography


21779980
A survey of APC mutations in Quebec
This is an 11-year survey of molecular analysis of APC germline mutations for the province of Quebec done at the Molecular Pathology Unit of the Jewish General Hospital which offers genetic testing for hereditary forms of colorectal cancer for the whole of Quebec province. We report on 47 unique mutations seen in 66 families affected with familial adenomatous polyposis. Of these unique mutations, 60% are short indels, 28% are point mutations, and 6% are whole exon deletions. The absence of founder mutations and the variety of mutations encountered reinforce the value of RNA-based testing and the need for gene dosage techniques such as multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.

27000756
Three novel mutations of APC gene in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of colonic adenomas and an increased risk of colorectal cancer. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), encoding a large multidomain protein involved in antagonizing the Wnt signaling pathway, has been identified as the main causative gene responsible for FAP. In this study, we identified three novel mutations as well as two recurrent mutations in the APC in five Chinese FAP families by sequencing. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that among these mutations, a nonsense mutation (c.2510C>G) and two small deletions (c.2016_2047del, c.3180_3184del) led to the truncation of the APC protein and the cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation of β-catenin in the colorectal samples from affected individuals, respectively. Our study expands the database on mutations of APC and provides evidence to understand the function of APC in FAP.

25142776
Comprehensive screening for mutations associated with colorectal cancer in unselected cases reveals penetrant and nonpenetrant mutations
Germline mutation testing in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) is offered only to a subset of patients with a clinical presentation or tumor histology suggestive of familial CRC syndromes, probably underestimating familial CRC predisposition. The aim of our study was to determine whether unbiased screening of newly diagnosed CRC cases with next generation sequencing (NGS) increases the overall detection rate of germline mutations. We analyzed 152 consecutive CRC patients for germline mutations in 18 CRC-associated genes using NGS. All patients were also evaluated for Bethesda criteria and all tumors were investigated for microsatellite instability, immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins and the BRAF*V600E somatic mutation. NGS based sequencing identified 27 variants in 9 genes in 23 out of 152 patients studied (18%). Three of them were already reported as pathogenic and 12 were class 3 germline variants with an uncertain prediction of pathogenicity. Only 1 of these patients fulfilled Bethesda criteria and had a microsatellite instable tumor and an MLH1 germline mutation. The others would have been missed with current approaches: 2 with a MSH6 premature termination mutation and 12 uncertain, potentially pathogenic class 3 variants in APC, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, MSH3 and MLH3. The higher NGS mutation detection rate compared with current testing strategies based on clinicopathological criteria is probably due to the large genetic heterogeneity and overlapping clinical presentation of the various CRC syndromes. It can also identify apparently nonpenetrant germline mutations complicating the clinical management of the patients and their families.

19444466
APC mutation spectrum of Norwegian familial adenomatous polyposis families: high ratio of novel mutations
Introduction:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Massive formation of colorectal adenomas, of which some will inevitably develop into adenocarcinomas, is the hallmark of the disease. Characterization of causative APC mutations allows presymptomatic diagnosis, close follow-up and prophylactic intervention in families. To date more than 900 different germline mutations have been characterized worldwide demonstrating allelic heterogeneity.

15857185
APC germ-line mutations in southern Spanish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: genotype-phenotype correlations and identification of eight novel mutations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a disease characterized by the presence of hundreds of adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum which, if not treated, develop into colorectal cancer. FAP is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder caused by mutation in the APC gene. The aim of this study was to search for germ-line mutations of the APC gene in unrelated FAP families from southern Spain. By direct sequencing of all APC gene exons, we found the mutation in 13 of 15 unrelated FAP families studied. We identified eight novel mutations: 707delA (exon6), 730_731delAG (exon7), 1787C-->G and 1946_1947insG (exon14), 2496delC, 2838_2839delAT, 2977A-->T, and 3224dupA (exon15). Two patients presented de novo germ-line mutations. Genotype-phenotype correlations for extraintestinal and extracolonic manifestations were studied. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability was observed in two families with mutations in exon/intron boundary, probably due to alternative splicing.

14961559
The mutation spectrum of the APC gene in FAP patients from southern Italy: detection of known and four novel mutations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited condition accounting for about 1% of all colorectal cancers, results from mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. The clinical spectrum and severity of FAP varies greatly with the mutation site, and both between and within families. Using the protein truncation test, single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and DNA sequencing, we identified 30 (75%) mutant alleles in 40 unrelated FAP families, for a total of 22 different APC mutations. Of these, 18 are known and 4 are novel: c.1797C>A (C599X), c.893_894delAC, (c.3225T>A; c.3226C>A) and c.4526_4527insT. Of the 30 APC gene mutations, 5 (approximately 17%) are nonsense mutations, 17 (approximately 57%) are small deletions, 5 (approximately 17%) are small insertions and 3 (approximately 10%) are complete deletions. All mutations occurred in single pedigrees, except those at codons 1061 and 1062, each found in two unrelated families, and the mutation at codon 1309 in exon 15, found in five unrelated families. About 40% of mutations, mostly small deletions and insertions, are located at repeated sequences; they promote misalignment-mediated errors in DNA replication and could represent a hot spot mutation region. This study enlarges the spectrum of APC gene mutations and sheds light on the correlation between the site of APC germline mutations and clinical manifestations of FAP.

17963004
Mutational screening of the APC gene in Chilean families with familial adenomatous polyposis: nine novel truncating mutations
Purpose:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis is characterized by the development of hundreds of adenomatous polyps located mainly in the colon and rectum. Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis who do not receive treatment will develop cancer before aged 40 years. This disease is caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Different studies have shown a correlation between the location of the mutation and the clinical phenotype, such as the grade of severity and/or the presence of extracolonic manifestations, such as desmoid tumors. This study was designed to identify germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in Chilean families with familial adenomatous polyposis.

9101302
Characterization of 19 novel and six recurring APC mutations in Italian adenomatous polyposis patients, using two different mutation detection techniques


25590978
Racial variation in frequency and phenotypes of APC and MUTYH mutations in 6,169 individuals undergoing genetic testing
Purpose:
        
      
      The aim of this study was to assess whether differences in frequency and phenotype of APC and MUTYH mutations exist among racially/ethnically diverse populations.

15446460
[Increased sensitivity for detection of mutations in exon 15 of the APC gene in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis]
Background:
        
      
      Protein Truncation Test (PTT) was used to detect mutations in exon 15 of the APC gene in patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. This method is limited by its ability to detect polypetide chains up to a certain minimum length. The aim of this study was to increase the sensitivity of detection of mutations in this region by using the technique of Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE).

16883523
[A novel APC gene germline mutation in a familial adenomatous polyposis pedigree]
Objective:
        
      
      To detect the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene germline mutation in the proband and her family members with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).

26414517
Adenoma development in familial adenomatous polyposis and MUTYH-associated polyposis: somatic landscape and driver genes
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) are inherited disorders associated with multiple colorectal adenomas that lead to a very high risk of colorectal cancer. The somatic mutations that drive adenoma development in these conditions have not been investigated comprehensively. In this study we performed analysis of paired colorectal adenoma and normal tissue DNA from individuals with FAP or MAP, sequencing 14 adenoma whole exomes (eight MAP, six FAP), 55 adenoma targeted exomes (33 MAP, 22 FAP) and germline DNA from each patient, and a further 63 adenomas by capillary sequencing (41 FAP, 22 MAP). With these data we examined the profile of mutated genes, the mutational signatures and the somatic mutation rates, observing significant diversity in the constellations of mutated driver genes in different adenomas, and loss-of-function mutations in WTX (9%; p < 9.99e-06), a gene implicated in regulation of the WNT pathway and p53 acetylation. These data extend our understanding of the early events in colorectal tumourigenesis in the polyposis syndromes.

21643010
Inactivation of promoter 1B of APC causes partial gene silencing: evidence for a significant role of the promoter in regulation and causative of familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Two promoters, 1A and 1B, have been recognized in APC, and 1B is thought to have a minor role in the regulation of the gene. We have identified a novel deletion encompassing half of this promoter in the largest family (Family 1) of the Swedish Polyposis Registry. The mutation leads to an imbalance in allele-specific expression of APC, and transcription from promoter 1B was highly impaired in both normal colorectal mucosa and blood from mutation carriers. To establish the significance of promoter 1B in normal colorectal mucosa (from controls), expression levels of specific transcripts from each of the promoters, 1A and 1B, were examined, and the expression from 1B was significantly higher compared with 1A. Significant amounts of transcripts generated from promoter 1B were also determined in a panel of 20 various normal tissues examined. In FAP-related tumors, the APC germline mutation is proposed to dictate the second hit. Mutations leaving two or three out of seven 20-amino-acid repeats in the central domain of APC intact seem to be required for tumorigenesis. We examined adenomas from mutation carriers in Family 1 for second hits in the entire gene without any findings, however, loss of the residual expression of the deleterious allele was observed. Three major conclusions of significant importance in relation to the function of APC can be drawn from this study; (i) germline inactivation of promoter 1B is disease causing in FAP; (ii) expression of transcripts from promoter 1B is generated at considerable higher levels compared with 1A, demonstrating a hitherto unknown importance of 1B; (iii) adenoma formation in FAP, caused by impaired function of promoter 1B, does not require homozygous inactivation of APC allowing for alternative genetic models as basis for adenoma formation.

33309985
Population-based Screening for Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Variants in Japan
Background & aims:
        
      
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers in the world. A small proportion of CRCs can be attributed to recognizable hereditary germline variants of known CRC susceptibility genes. To better understand cancer risk, it is necessary to explore the prevalence of hereditary CRC and pathogenic variants of multiple cancer-predisposing genes in non-European populations.

11317365
Nine novel APC mutations in Italian FAP patients
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a common hereditary syndrome characterized by early development of colorectal cancer consequent to extensive adenomatous polyps of the colon. In addition to the colonic manifestations the syndrome presents several extracolonic features including polyps of the upper gastrointestinal tract, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment, jaw cysts, osteomata and desmoid tumors. In this study the entire APC coding region has been analysed for mutation in a panel of one Turcot and 33 unrelated Italian FAP patients using SSCP analysis, PTT and DNA sequencing. We detected APC mutations in 23 of them and identified nine which, to our knowledge were not previously reported. All of these novel mutations are in exon 15, including two nonsense mutations, 6 deletions or insertions leading to premature termination of the protein and one missense mutation (7697G>A). This last mutation occurs in the EB1-binding domain of the APC protein and segregates in four relatives of the patient with three of them presenting 2-3 adenomatous polyps.

8252631
Restriction of ocular fundus lesions to a specific subgroup of APC mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli patients
In humans, alteration of the tumor suppressor gene, APC, causes adenomatous polyposis coli, a condition causing predisposition to colorectal cancer. The syndrome inconsistently associates characteristic patches of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE). Ocular examination revealed that patients expressing CHRPE tend to cluster within specific families. The exact APC mutation was identified in 42 unrelated patients. In all cases these mutations were predicted to lead to the synthesis of a truncated protein. The extent of CHRPE was found to be dependent on the position of the mutation along the coding sequence. CHRPE lesions are almost always absent if the mutation occurs before exon 9, but are systematically present if it occurs after this exon. Thus, the range of phenotypic expression observed among affected patients may result in part from different allelic manifestations of APC mutations.

31269945
Next-generation sequencing with comprehensive bioinformatics analysis facilitates somatic mosaic APC gene mutation detection in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant colorectal tumor characterized by numerous adenomatous colonic polyps that often lead to colon cancer. Although most patients with FAP harbored germline mutations in APC gene, it was recently recognized that patients with clinical FAP, but without detectable pathogenic mutations, could be associated with somatic mosaic APC mutation.

16478792
Possible involvement of hyperlipidemia in increasing risk of colorectal tumor development in human familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) results from germline adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations and many affected patients die from colorectal cancers which arise from colorectal polyps. We previously reported that two strains of Apc gene-deficient mice developing multiple intestinal polyps exhibit a hyperlipidemic state. The triglyceride (TG) levels were approximately 10-fold higher than the levels observed in wild-type mice.

9916927
Familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid cancer: a clinical, pathological, and molecular genetics study
We report two familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) kindreds with thyroid cancer, harboring two apparently novel germlineAPC mutations. The clinical phenotype in the first kindred was typical of classical adenomatous polyposis, whereas the second kindred exhibited an attenuated adenomatous polyposis phenotype. There was a female predominance with a mean age of 34 years (range, 23-49) at cancer diagnosis. Multiple sections of four thyroid tumors from three FAP patients were analyzed in detail. Histological examination of thyroid tumors showed a range of morphological features. Some tumors exhibited typical papillary architecture and were associated with multifocal carcinoma; in others, there were unusual areas of cribriform morphology, and spindle-cell components with whorled architecture. Immunoreactivity for thyroglobulin and high molecular weight keratins was strong. Somatic APC mutation analysis revealed an insertion of a novel long interspersed nuclear element-1-like sequence in one tumor sample, suggesting disruption of APC. In three FAP patients, ret/PTC-1 and ret/PTC-3 were expressed in thyroid cancers. No positivity was observed for ret/ PTC-2. p53 immunohistochemistry was positive in only one section of a recurrent thyroid tumor sample. Our data suggest that genetic alterations in FAP-associated thyroid cancer involve loss of function of APC along with the gain of function of ret/PTC, while alterations of p53 do not appear to be an early event in thyroid tumorigenesis.

10083733
Germline mutations of the APC gene in Korean familial adenomatous polyposis patients
We extensively analyzed genomic DNA and messenger RNA (mRNA) from 62 unrelated Korean patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) for identification of germline adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations. We adopted both single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and a method of analysis involving the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by a protein truncation test (PTT). DNA sequencing confirmed all alterations represented by aberrant bands. Germline mutations were identified in 38 patients (61%). Nineteen of the detected mutations were presumed to be novel, thus emphasizing the heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in Korean FAP patients. In the initial 48 patients, SSCP analysis was followed by PTT for those patients for whom no detectable mutations were found by SSCP. Using this combined approach, we identified germline APC gene mutations in 29 of the 48 FAP patients (60%), including 6 patients in whom SSCP analysis failed to distinguish the mutant allele. In the 14 later patients, we identified truncating mutations in 9 patients (64%) using PTT only. Our results confirm that the mutation detection rate with PTT was superior to that with SSCP, and suggest that PTT would be a more practical screening method to detect germline mutations of the APC gene in FAP patients.

8544194
Genotype-phenotype correlations of new causative APC gene mutations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Nine new causative mutations and seven previously characterised mutations of the APC gene of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) were analysed for any genotype-phenotype correlations. The only clear genotype-phenotype correlation found was between the position of the mutation site and the presence or absence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE). A more distal mutation site was associated with an earlier age of onset of symptoms and a larger number of colonic polyps, but a notable amount of intrafamilial variation was observed.

31744909
Genomic and transcriptomic profiling of carcinogenesis in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Objective:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is characterised by the development of hundreds to thousands of adenomas at different evolutionary stages in the colon and rectum that will inevitably progress to adenocarcinomas if left untreated. Here, we investigated the genetic alterations and transcriptomic transitions from precancerous adenoma to carcinoma.

7833931
Four novel mutations of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene in FAP patients


9950360
Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 205 families: extended genotype-phenotype correlations in FAP and evidence for the role of APC amino acid changes in colorectal cancer predisposition
Background/aims:
        
      
      The development of colorectal cancer and a variable range of extracolonic manifestations in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is the result of the dominant inheritance of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations. In this study, direct mutation analysis of the APC gene was performed to determine genotype-phenotype correlations for nine extracolonic manifestations and to investigate the incidence of APC mutations in non-FAP colorectal cancer.

9476377
[Familial adenomatous polyposis coli in the Czech population. I. Detection of an additional 3 mutations out of a total of 7 in exon 15 of the APC gene]
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease characterized by multiple adenomatous polyps in the colon which progress to carcinoma. FAP is caused by germ-line mutation of the tumor-suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, the structure and coding sequence of which have been known from 1991. The diagnosis of FAP has classically been based on the detection of multiple colorectal adenomas, often after carcinoma development. Presymptomatic genetic testing for the presence of an allele carrying the FAP mutation is now possible using a variety of techniques.

16134147
Mutations of APC and MYH in unrelated Italian patients with adenomatous polyposis coli
The analysis of APC and MYH mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli patients should provide clues about the genetic heterogeneity of the syndrome in human populations. The entire coding region and intron-exon borders of the APC and MYH genes were analyzed in 60 unrelated Italian adenomatous polyposis coli patients. APC analysis revealed 26 point mutations leading to premature termination, one missense variant and one deletion spanning the entire coding region in 32 unrelated patients. Novel truncating point mutations included c.1176_1177insT (p.His393_PhefsX396), c.1354_1355del (p.Val452_SerfsX458), c.2684C>A (p.Ser895X), c.2711_2712del (p.Arg904_LysfsX910), c.2758_2759del (p.Asp920_CysfsX922), c.4192_4193del (p.Ser1398_SerfsX1407), c.4717G>T (p.Glu1573X) and a novel cryptic APC exon 6 splice site. MYH analysis revealed nine different germline variants in nine patients, of whom five were homozygotes or compound heterozygotes. The mutations included 4 novel MYH missense variants (c.692G>A, p.Arg231His; c.778C>T, p.Arg260Trp; c.1121T>C, p.Leu374Pro; and c.1234C>T, p.Arg412Cys) affecting conserved amino acid residues in the ENDO3c or NUDIX domains of the protein and one novel synonymous change (c.672C>T, p.Asn224Asn). Genotype-phenotype correlations were found in carriers of APC mutations but not in carriers of biallelic MYH mutations, except for a negative correlation with low number of polyps. A distinctive characteristic of patients negative for APC and MYH mutations was a significantly (p<0.0001) older age at diagnosis compared to patients with APC mutations. Moreover, the proportion of cases with an attenuated polyposis phenotype was higher (p = 0.0008) among patients negative for APC and MYH mutations than among carriers of APC or biallelic MYH mutations.

7746201
Genetic counselling and gene mutation analysis in familial adenomatous polyposis in Western Australia
Objective:
        
      
      To assess the provision of accurate pre-symptomatic genetic testing with DNA analysis and appropriate counselling for individuals and families known to be at high risk of developing familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP).

14522379
Familial hepatoblastoma and APC gene mutations: renewed call for molecular research
Recent findings have increased our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of hepatoblastoma and their relationship to the molecular pathology of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Here, we describe hepatoblastoma in siblings who share a gene mutation for FAP inherited from their father. This observation confirms the link between these diseases and has implications for future molecular research. We also raise the question; should other members of 'at-risk' families be screened following a new diagnosis of either hepatoblastoma or FAP?

32088909
Small adrenal incidentaloma becoming an aggressive adrenocortical carcinoma in a patient carrying a germline APC variant
Purpose:
        
      
      Recent guidelines on adrenal incidentalomas suggested in patients with an indeterminate adrenal mass and no significant hormone excess that follow up with a repeat noncontrast CT or MRI after 6-12 months may be an option.

8730280
Correlation between the development of extracolonic manifestations in FAP patients and mutations beyond codon 1403 in the APC gene
The APC gene was investigated in 31 unrelated polyposis coli families by SSCP analysis and the protein truncation test. Twenty-three germline mutations were identified which gave rise to a variety of different phenotypes. Some of these mutations have already been described; however we report six previously unpublished mutations. Typical disease symptoms were observed in families who harboured mutations between exon 4 (codon 169) and codon 1393 of exon 15. Mutations beyond codon 1403 were associated with more varied phenotype with respect to the development of extracolonic symptoms. In this report we provide support for the notion that there appears to be a correlation between the location of an APC mutation (beyond codon 1403) and extracolonic manifestations of familial adenomatous polyposis.

27705013
Colorectal Adenomatous Polyposis: Heterogeneity of Susceptibility Gene Mutations and Phenotypes in a Cohort of Italian Patients
Aims:
        
      
      Colorectal adenomatous polyposis entailing cancer predisposition is caused by constitutional mutations in different genes. APC is associated with the familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP/AFAP) and MUTYH with the MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP), while POLE and POLD1 mutations cause the polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis (PPAP).

18425378
First genetic analysis in Tunisian familial adenomatous polyposis probands
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps in colon and rectum. The APC gene (adenomatous polyposis coli) is considered as the major mutated gene in FAP. It has been shown that biallelic germline mutations in the base-excision-repair gene MYH can be responsible for a recessive inheritance of adenomatous polyposis (AP). This study is the first Tunisian genetic analysis on AP patients. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was used to screen the APC gene for large genomic rearrangements. The total APC and MYH exon sequences and exon-intron edges were sequenced in an effort to detect germline mutations, four were explored. Mutations were detected in four patients that fulfil the clinical criteria of AP. Three mutations were found in the APC gene, of which two were novel (c.1636_1639delAGTG and c.2514 G>T) and all gave rise to a truncated APC protein. The missense G382D mutation, already described in north and south European populations was found in the MYH gene at the homozygous state in the fourth patient with moderate AP. Our preliminary study provides a basis for implementation of genetic counselling for AP.

19279422
Implication of adenomatous polyposis coli and MUTYH mutations in familial colorectal polyposis
Purpose:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis is an autosomal dominantly inherited syndrome characterized by hundreds or thousands of colorectal polyps and a high risk of colorectal cancer at a young age. Truncating germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene are detected in approximately 80 percent of patients with classical familial adenomatous polyposis and in approximately 10 percent of the attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis patients.

22395475
Molecular characterization of parathyroid tumors from two patients with hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes
The tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) has recently been implicated in parathyroid development. We here report clinical, histopathological and molecular investigations in parathyroid tumors arising in two patients; one familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) syndrome patient carrying a constitutional APC mutation, and one Lynch syndrome patient demonstrating a germline MLH1 mutation as well as a non-classified, missense alteration of the APC gene. We sequenced the entire APC gene in tumor and constitutional DNA from both cases, assessed the levels of APC promoter 1A and 1B methylation by bisulfite Pyrosequencing analysis and performed immunohistochemistry for APC and parafibromin. In addition, copy number analysis regarding the APC gene on chromosome 5q21-22 was performed using qRT-PCR. Histopathological workup confirmed both tumors as parathyroid adenomas without signs of malignancy or atypia. No somatic mutations or copy number changes for the APC gene were discovered in the tumors; however, in both cases, the APC promoter 1A was hypermethylated while the APC promoter 1B was unmethylated. APC promoter 1B-specific mRNA and total APC mRNA levels were higher than in normal parathyroid samples. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed strong APC protein immunoreactivity and positive parafibromin expression in both parathyroid tumors. Absence of additional somatic APC mutations and copy number changes in addition to the positive APC immunoreactivity obtained suggest that the tumors arose without biallelic inactivation of the APC tumor suppressor gene. The finding of an unmethylated APC promoter 1B and high APC 1B mRNA levels could explain the maintained APC protein expression. Moreover, the findings of positive parafibromin and APC immunoreactivity as well as a low MIB-1 proliferation index and absence of histopathological features of malignancy/atypical adenoma indicate that the parathyroid adenomas arising in these patients did not harbor malignant potential.

8187091
Characteristics of somatic mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in colorectal tumors
Mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene was analyzed in 500 colorectal tumors from 70 familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and 102 non-FAP patients and in normal tissues from 119 FAP patients, using polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism and direct sequencing methods. These tumors were histopathologically diagnosed. Sixty-eight germ line mutations (62% deletion, 9% insertion, and 29% single-base substitution) and 241 somatic mutations (56% deletion, 12% insertion, and 32% single-base substitution) were detected. All mutations formed stop codons resulting in truncated APC proteins, except for one germ line mutation. Differences were found between somatic and germ line mutations, including 3 new hot spots of mutation at codons 1378, 1450, and 1487-1490, which frequently occurred in somatic mutations but not in germ lines. The frequency of mutation in each histopathological type of FAP tumor was 53% in moderate adenoma, 64% in severe adenoma, 52% in intramucosal carcinoma, and 33% in invasive carcinoma, whereas the loss of heterozygosity including the APC gene increased with development to each histopathological type. A similar tendency was observed in non-FAP tumors. Additionally, we found 10 FAP tumors that had both somatic mutation and loss of heterozygosity. These tumors were assumed to have developed from moderate adenomas with germ line and somatic mutations, followed by deletion of the allele with germ line mutation. These results suggest that inactivation of the APC gene by two mutations is involved in the development of moderate adenoma, and loss of heterozygosity of the APC gene is associated with further development to carcinoma. It was also observed that the distribution of 75 somatic mutations from one FAP patient on the APC sequence was similar to the distribution of 159 somatic mutations from 83 patients with FAP and non-FAP, which suggests that the position of somatic mutation is mostly due to the APC sequence itself.

29367705
Somatic APC mosaicism and oligogenic inheritance in genetically unsolved colorectal adenomatous polyposis patients
Germline variants in the APC gene cause familial adenomatous polyposis. Inherited variants in MutYH, POLE, POLD1, NTHL1, and MSH3 genes and somatic APC mosaicism have been reported as alternative causes of polyposis. However, ~30-50% of cases of polyposis remain genetically unsolved. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate the genetic causes of unexplained adenomatous polyposis. Eight sporadic cases with >20 adenomatous polyps by 35 years of age or >50 adenomatous polyps by 55 years of age, and no causative germline variants in APC and/or MutYH, were enrolled from a cohort of 56 subjects with adenomatous colorectal polyposis. APC gene mosaicism was investigated on DNA from colonic adenomas by Sanger sequencing or Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). Mosaicism extension to other tissues (peripheral blood, saliva, hair follicles) was evaluated using Sanger sequencing and/or digital PCR. APC second hit was investigated in adenomas from mosaic patients. WES was performed on DNA from peripheral blood to identify additional polyposis candidate variants. We identified APC mosaicism in 50% of patients. In three cases mosaicism was restricted to the colon, while in one it also extended to the duodenum and saliva. One patient without APC mosaicism, carrying an APC in-frame deletion of uncertain significance, was found to harbor rare germline variants in OGG1, POLQ, and EXO1 genes. In conclusion, our restrictive selection criteria improved the detection of mosaic APC patients. In addition, we showed for the first time that an oligogenic inheritance of rare variants might have a cooperative role in sporadic colorectal polyposis onset.

11748858
Molecular and clinical characteristics in 32 families affected with familial adenomatous polyposis
Germ-line mutations in the 5' half of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene are found in about 80% of the patients affected with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). The vast majority of these are nonsense or frameshift mutations which result in the loss of the carboxyl terminus of the APC protein. Using an in vivo assay in yeast, we have identified pathogenic germ-line mutations in 26 of 32 (81%) unrelated Swiss families affected with FAP. Nine mutations were novel and eight families were shown to harbor two recurrent mutations. Correlations were attempted between the location of APC germ-line mutations and clinical manifestations of the disease.

20649969
Mutational spectrum of APC and genotype-phenotype correlations in Greek FAP patients
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis, an autosomal dominant inherited disease caused by germline mutations within the APC gene, is characterized by early onset colorectal cancer as a consequence of the intrinsic phenotypic feature of multiple colorectal adenomatic polyps. The genetic investigation of Greek adenomatous polyposis families was performed in respects to APC and MUTYH germline mutations. Additionally, all available published mutations were considered in order to define the APC mutation spectrum in Greece.

12581900
Novel mutations of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis in Greek patients
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a premalignant clinical entity inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, is characterized by the development thousands of adenomatous polyps of the colorectum during the 2nd and 3rd decade of life. Approximately 80% of patients with FAP harbor truncating germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. We tested 24 members of six Greek families. All patients had the FAP phenotype, and one patient had an extracolonic tumor (medulloblastoma). Our method for testing was the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification from genomic DNA extracted from whole blood, followed by automated DNA sequencing. Two novel truncating mutations (2601delGA and R923X) and three already-known mutations (R876X, Q1045X, and D1822V) were found. Other polymorphisms were also found. We identified the inactivating APC mutation in 12 of 13 of our FAP patients. Our results suggest that PCR sequencing is a reliable method for screening the APC gene for germline mutations.

30324682
Identification of Lynch syndrome risk variants in the Romanian population
Two familial forms of colorectal cancer (CRC), Lynch syndrome (LS) and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), are caused by rare mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) and the genes APC and MUTYH, respectively. No information is available on the presence of high-risk CRC mutations in the Romanian population. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 61 Romanian CRC cases with a family history of cancer and/or early onset of disease, focusing the analysis on candidate variants in the LS and FAP genes. The frequencies of all candidate variants were assessed in a cohort of 688 CRC cases and 4567 controls. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 was performed on tumour tissue. We identified 11 candidate variants in 11 cases; six variants in MLH1, one in MSH6, one in PMS2, and three in APC. Combining information on the predicted impact of the variants on the proteins, IHC results and previous reports, we found three novel pathogenic variants (MLH1:p.Lys84ThrfsTer4, MLH1:p.Ala586CysfsTer7, PMS2:p.Arg211ThrfsTer38), and two novel variants that are unlikely to be pathogenic. Also, we confirmed three previously published pathogenic LS variants and suggest to reclassify a previously reported variant of uncertain significance to pathogenic (MLH1:c.1559-1G>C).

16292097
An unexpected Cowden syndrome case found among members of a large familial adenomatous polyposis kindred
Genetic testing is now considered the standard of care in the management of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Non-carriers of mutations are excluded from endoscopic surveillance. During the systematic screening of the relatives of an affected member with FAP, one non-carrier of APC mutations was unexpectedly found with the typical Cowden syndrome phenotype. One large Algerian family with FAP was screened for an APC germline mutation. Moreover, we also performed a mutation search in the Cowden syndrome member for PTEN, BMPR1A or MADH4 (SMAD4) germline mutations. We identified a mutation in the APC gene that results in a truncated protein (Y935X) in the FAP proband, and subsequently in 12 FAP-affected members. Among the 12 APC mutation-negative members of this family, we found one member with the Cowden disease phenotype. However, the mutation analysis in the PTEN gene and the two other genes involved in juvenile polyposis, namely BMPR1A and MADH4 (SMAD4), in the Cowden syndrome patient failed to show any pathogenic mutation. Genetic testing is a powerful tool that can provide a definitive diagnosis for FAP. However, not all polyposes in the FAP family are adenomatous polyposes.

24055113
Actionable, pathogenic incidental findings in 1,000 participants' exomes
The incorporation of genomics into medicine is stimulating interest on the return of incidental findings (IFs) from exome and genome sequencing. However, no large-scale study has yet estimated the number of expected actionable findings per individual; therefore, we classified actionable pathogenic single-nucleotide variants in 500 European- and 500 African-descent participants randomly selected from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Sequencing Project. The 1,000 individuals were screened for variants in 114 genes selected by an expert panel for their association with medically actionable genetic conditions possibly undiagnosed in adults. Among the 1,000 participants, 585 instances of 239 unique variants were identified as disease causing in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD). The primary literature supporting the variants' pathogenicity was reviewed. Of the identified IFs, only 16 unique autosomal-dominant variants in 17 individuals were assessed to be pathogenic or likely pathogenic, and one participant had two pathogenic variants for an autosomal-recessive disease. Furthermore, one pathogenic and four likely pathogenic variants not listed as disease causing in HGMD were identified. These data can provide an estimate of the frequency (∼3.4% for European descent and ∼1.2% for African descent) of the high-penetrance actionable pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in adults. The 23 participants with pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were disproportionately of European (17) versus African (6) descent. The process of classifying these variants underscores the need for a more comprehensive and diverse centralized resource to provide curated information on pathogenicity for clinical use to minimize health disparities in genomic medicine.

31069152
APC germline hepatoblastomas demonstrate cisplatin-induced intratumor tertiary lymphoid structures
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most common liver cancer in children. We aimed to characterize HB related to APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) germline mutation (APC-HB). This French multicentric retrospective study included 12 APC-HB patients under 5 at diagnosis. Clinical features of APC-HB were compared to the French SIOPEL2-3 cohort of HB patients. Molecular and histopathological analyses of APC-HB were compared to 15 consecutive sporadic HB treated at Bicêtre hospital from 2013 to 2015 (non-APC-HB). APC-HB patients have a peculiar spectrum of germline APC mutations, with no events in the main hotspot of classical APC mutations at codon 1309 (P < .05). Compared to sporadic HB, they have similar clinical features including good prognosis since all patients are alive in complete remission at last follow-up. APC-HB are mostly well-limited tumors with fetal predominance and few mesenchymal components. All APC-HB have an activated Wnt/β-catenin pathway without CTNNB1 mutation, confirming that germline APC and somatic CTNNB1 mutations are mutually exclusive (P < .001). Pathological reviewing identified massive intratumor tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) containing both lymphocytes and antigen-presenting cells in all 11 APC-HB cases who received cisplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy but not in five pre-chemotherapy samples (four paired biopsies and one patient resected without chemotherapy), indicating that these TLS are induced by chemotherapy (P < .001). Conclusion: APC-HB show a good prognosis, they are all infiltrated by cisplatin-induced TLS, a feature only retrieved in a minority of non-APC-HB. This suggests that APC inactivation can synergize with cisplatin to induce an immunogenic cell death that initiates an anti-tumor immune response.

28413499
Identification a nonsense mutation of APC gene in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; Mendelian of Inherintance in Man ID, 175100) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the development of numerous adenomatous polyps throughout the colon and rectum associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer. FAP is at time accompanied with certain extraintestinal manifestations such as congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, dental disorders and desmoid tumors. It is caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The present study reported on a Chinese family with FAP. Polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing of the full coding sequence of the APC gene were performed to identify the mutation in this family. A nonsense mutation of the APC gene was identified in this pedigree. It is a heterozygous G>T substitution at position 2,971 in exon 15 of the APC gene, which formed a premature stop codon at amino acid residue 991 (p.Glu991*). The resulting truncated protein lacked 1,853 amino acids. The present study expanded the database on APC gene mutations in FAP and enriched the spectrum of known germline mutations of the APC gene. Prophylactic proctocolectomy may be considered as a possible treatment for carriers of the mutation.

18166348
Functional characterization of the novel APC N1026S variant associated with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis
Background & aims:
        
      
      We identified the APC N1026S variant of unknown malignant potential in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in a Spanish attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) family. The variant was located in the first of the 4 highly conserved 15-amino acid (AA) repeats within the beta-catenin union domain. Our aim was to determine its functional relevance to establish its pathogenicity.

16890597
Immunohistochemical expression of MYH protein can be used to identify patients with MYH-associated polyposis
Background & aims:
        
      
      MYH-associated polyposis is a recently described, autosomal-recessive disease characterized by multiple colorectal adenomas and cancer. There are only few immunohistochemical studies of the MYH protein. We investigated the expression pattern of the MYH protein to evaluate whether a immunohistochemical approach could be used in clinical practice to screen patients for germline mutations in the MYH gene.

7981688
Identification of a novel germline mutation in a FAP family


11677205
Periampullary adenomas and adenocarcinomas in familial adenomatous polyposis: cumulative risks and APC gene mutations
Background & aims:
        
      
      Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) have a high prevalence of duodenal adenomas, and the region of the ampulla of Vater is the predilection site for duodenal adenocarcinomas. This study assessed the risk of stage IV periampullary adenomas according to the Spigelman classification and periampullary adenocarcinomas in Swedish FAP patients screened by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). The genotype of patients with stage IV periampullary adenomas and periampullary adenocarcinomas was also investigated.

25716913
Detection of APC mosaicism by next-generation sequencing in an FAP patient
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) of the colon is characterized by multiple polyps in the intestine and extra-colonic manifestations. Most FAP cases are caused by a germline mutation in the tumor-suppressor gene APC, but some cases of adenomatous polyposis result from germline mutations in MUTYH, POLD1 or POLE. Although sequence analysis of APC by the Sanger method is routinely performed for genetic testing, there remain cases whose mutations are not detected by the analysis. Next-generation sequencing has enabled us to analyze the comprehensive human genome, improving the chance of identifying disease causative variants. In this study, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of a sporadic FAP patient in which we did not find any pathogenic APC mutations by the conventional Sanger sequencing. Whole-genome sequencing and subsequent deep sequencing identified a mosaic mutation of c.3175G>T, p.E1059X in ~12% of his peripheral leukocytes. Additional deep sequencing of his buccal mucosa, hair follicles, non-cancerous mucosa of the stomach and colon disclosed that these tissues harbored the APC mutation at different frequencies. Our data implied that genetic analysis by next-generation sequencing is an effective strategy to identify genetic mosaicism in hereditary diseases.

22864254
A porcine model of familial adenomatous polyposis
We created gene-targeted pigs with mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene (APC) that are orthologous to those responsible for human familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). One-year-old pigs with the APC(1311) mutation (orthologous to human APC(1309)) have aberrant crypt foci and low- and high-grade dysplastic adenomas in the large intestine, similar to the precancerous lesions that develop in patients with FAP. Dysplastic adenomas accumulate β-catenin and lose heterozygosity of APC. This large-animal, genetic model of FAP will be useful in the development of diagnostics and therapeutics for colorectal cancer. DNA sequence data: NCBI accession number GU951771.

30569724
Two Czech patients with familial adenomatous polyposis presenting mosaicism in APC gene
During standard molecular diagnostic procedure, two Czech families with APC (Adenomatous polyposis coli gene) mosaicism have been detected. A woman with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP, OMIM #175100) was recently inspected by next generation sequencing. Standard bioinformatics pipeline, restricted to variants with at least 20% of reads (for germline variants) would miss mutation p.G1412X (NM_000038.5) present in 17% of reads. This novel variant was not present in any of her two children. Another woman with a clinical manifestation of attenuated FAP was tested 16 years ago without conclusive APC mutation found when denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), protein truncation test (PTT), multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) and direct Sanger sequencing were applied. Recent inspection of her son showed clear mutation p.Q1062X (NM_000038.5, NP_000029.2) leading to premature stop codon. This finding led to re-evaluation of this protein position in his mother and detection of mosaicism (11% of allele, 22% of heterozygous cells in blood), which was primarily overlooked. Mutations in both patients were confirmed by allele-specific real time PCR (AS qPCR). In both index patients it was possible to detect and quantify the mosaic allele in biological samples of polyps, adjacent colonic mucosa and buccal swabs. In cases of sporadic appearance of FAP, besides blood we plan to preferably inspect also other samples, where mosaic fraction might be under detection limit of bioinformatics pipelines (<3%). For our future routine NGS sequencing analysis we will apply our in-house somatic variant detection pipeline to minimize the false negative calls when genes with high level of de-novo mutations are analyzed.

30256826
Novel genetic mutations detected by multigene panel are associated with hereditary colorectal cancer predisposition
Half of the high-risk colorectal cancer families that fulfill the clinical criteria for Lynch syndrome lack germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes and remain unexplained. Genetic testing for hereditary cancers is rapidly evolving due to the introduction of multigene panels, which may identify more mutations than the old screening methods. The aim of this study is the use of a Next Generation Sequencing panel in order to find the genes involved in the cancer predisposition of these families. For this study, 98 patients from these unexplained families were tested with a multigene panel targeting 94 genes involved in cancer predisposition. The mutations found were validated by Sanger sequencing and the segregation was studied when possible. We identified 19 likely pathogenic variants in 18 patients. Out of these, 8 were found in MMR genes (5 in MLH1, 1 in MSH6 and 2 in PMS2). In addition, 11 mutations were detected in other genes, including high penetrance genes (APC, SMAD4 and TP53) and moderate penetrance genes (BRIP1, CHEK2, MUTYH, HNF1A and XPC). Mutations c.1194G>A in SMAD4, c.714_720dup in PMS2, c.2050T>G in MLH1 and c.1635_1636del in MSH6 were novel. In conclusion, the detection of new pathogenic mutations in high and moderate penetrance genes could contribute to the explanation of the heritability of colorectal cancer, changing the individual clinical management. Multigene panel testing is a more effective method to identify germline variants in cancer patients compared to single-gene approaches and should be therefore included in clinical laboratories.

24518971
A unique profile of adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutations in Iranian patients suffering sporadic colorectal cancer
Objective:
        
      
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and aggressive cancers worldwide. The majority of CRC cases are sporadic that caused by somatic mutations. The Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC; OMIM 611731) is a tumor suppressor gene of Wnt pathway and is frequently mutated in CRC cases. This study was designed to investigate the spectrum of APC gene mutations in Iranian patients with sporadic colorectal cancer.

26613750
Low-level APC mutational mosaicism is the underlying cause in a substantial fraction of unexplained colorectal adenomatous polyposis cases
Background:
        
      
      In 30-50% of patients with colorectal adenomatous polyposis, no germline mutation in the known genes APC, causing familial adenomatous polyposis, MUTYH, causing MUTYH-associated polyposis, or POLE or POLD1, causing polymerase-proofreading-associated polyposis can be identified, although a hereditary aetiology is likely. This study aimed to explore the impact of APC mutational mosaicism in unexplained polyposis.

18224684
Difference in characteristics of APC mutations between colonic and extracolonic tumors of FAP patients: variations with phenotype
To clarify the differences in characteristics of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutations between colorectal tumors from various phenotypes of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and between colorectal and extracolonic tumors, we analyzed APC mutations in 86 colorectal tumors from FAP patients including profuse, sparse and attenuated types, 23 sporadic colorectal tumors and 40 FAP extracolonic tumors including duodenal, gastric and desmoid tumors. In all tumors, 1 allele of the truncated APC gene retained armadillo repeats, 15-amino-acid (aa) repeats and various numbers of 20-aa repeats, but lacked SAMP repeats, as a result of germline and somatic mutations. Regarding 20-aa repeats, the truncated APC gene retained 1 repeat due to allele loss in 96% (27/28) of colorectal tumors from profuse-type FAP, 69% (36/52) of sparse-type retained 2 repeats due to somatic mutation, and 100% (6/6) of attenuated-type retained 2 or 3 repeats due to the third or second hit. In sporadic colorectal tumors 74% (17/23) retained 1 or 2 repeats. The truncated APC gene retained 3 repeats in 88% (7/8) of FAP duodenal tumors, 100% (26/26) of gastric tumors retained 2 or 3 repeats and 83% (5/6) of desmoid tumors retained 2 repeats. These data suggest that the number of beta-catenin downregulating 20-aa repeats in truncated APC gene associated with colorectal tumorigenesis is different in profuse, sparse and attenuated types of FAP, and that the association with tumorigenesis is also different between colorectal and extracolonic tumors.

29518763
Medullary thyroid cancer, leukemia, mesothelioma and meningioma associated with germline APC and RASAL1 variants: a new syndrome?
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neuroendocrine tumor hereditary in 35% of cases. The most common syndromic form is in the context of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) syndromes in association with other tumors and due to germline RET mutations. We describe a 57-year-old female patient diagnosed with sporadic MTC. The patient had a history of other neoplasias, such as acute myeloid leukemia, for which she had received chemotherapy, and two other solid tumors, peritoneal mesothelioma and meningioma. Genetic analyses were carried out including whole exome and Sanger sequencing (WES and SS) and loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) testing for the respective loci. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used for the detection of proteins of interest. WES showed two germline variants in the APC and RASAL1 genes confirmed by SS. In MTC tissue only there was a RETvariant identified by SS; germline studies did not show any RETsequence changes. The pattern of tumors in this patient is unusual for either one of the APC- orRASAL1-associated neoplasms and her non-MEN 2-associated MTC contained a RET variant like other sporadic MTCs. As in other patients with more than one genetic variant predisposing to tumors, it is possible that this case represents a unique association.

26252958
Identification of a novel mutation associated with familial adenomatous polyposis and colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the most fatal forms of solid tumor in men and women. While the majority of diagnosed CRC cases are sporadic, 15‑25% of patients have a family history of adenomatous polyposis and CRC; however, the associated gene mutations remain largely unidentified. The aim of the present study was to investigate the genomes of a four‑generational Chinese Han family with familial adenomatous polyposis and CRC to identify the potential genetic anomalies associated with the disease. Diagnoses were made by physical and enteroscopic examinations of all the family members. Mutational analyses of the potential CRC‑associated genes were carried out by direct gene sequencing, and the statistically significant differences in polymorphisms between normal and diseased populations were determined. Multiple sequence alignment and protein modeling were conducted using the Vector NTI and DNAMAN software tools. Clinical and pathological features of all the examined patients were consistent with typical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) syndrome. From the genomes of these family members, a 131564T>C (p.1125Val>Ala) mutation was identified in exon 15 of the APC gene, and a 1126G>C (p.324Gln>His) mutation was identified in exon 12 of the MUTYH gene. The 131564T>C mutation co‑segregated with the affected individuals in the family and was specifically associated with the incidence of CRC (P=0.018<0.05). The 1125Val residue was highly conserved in the APC protein, and the p.1125Val>Ala mutation led to changes in the secondary structure and hydrophilicity of the APC protein. In conclusion, the APC gene mutation 131564T>C is associated with FAP and the pathogenesis of CRC.

19768578
Mutation analysis of the APC gene in Taiwanese FAP families: low incidence of APC germline mutation in a distinct subgroup of FAP families
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal-dominant disease caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The affected individuals develop colorectal polyposis and show various extra-colonic manifestations. In this study, we aimed to investigate the genetic and clinical characteristics of FAP in Taiwanese families and analyze the genotype-phenotype correlations. Blood samples were obtained from 66 FAP patients registered in the hereditary colorectal cancer database. Then, germline mutations in the APC genes of these 66 polyposis patients from 47 unrelated FAP families were analyzed. The germline-mutation-negative cases were analyzed by performing multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of the MUTYH gene. Among the analyzed families, 79% (37/47) of the families showed 28 APC mutations, including 19 frameshift mutations, 4 nonsense mutations, 3 genomic deletion mutations, 1 missense mutation, and 1 splice-site mutation. In addition, we identified 15 novel mutations in 32% (15/47) of the families. The cases in which APC mutations were not identified showed significantly lower incidence of profuse polyposis (P = 0.034) and gastroduodenal polyps (P = 0.027). Furthermore, FAP families in which some affected individuals had less than 100 polyps showed significant association with low incidence of APC germline mutations (P = 0.002). We have added the APC germline-mutation data for Taiwanese FAP patients and indicated the presence of an FAP subgroup comprising affected individuals with nonadenomatous polyps or less than 100 adenomatous polyps; this form of FAP is less frequently caused by germline mutations of the APC gene.

10094557
Detection of protein truncating mutations in exons 1-14 of the APC gene using an in vivo fusion protein assay. Mutations in brief no. 214. Online
About 80% of the mutations identified to date in the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene have been found in the 5' half of the coding sequence, the vast majority of which (>95%) are nonsense or frameshift mutations that result in the loss of the carboxyl terminus of APC protein. Using a stop codon assay in yeast recently developed by others (Ishioka et al., 1997), we have screened the 5' half of the APC gene for mutations in 7 unrelated families affected with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. The assay relies on the expression of a yeast reporter gene fused in frame to one of 3 contiguous segments of the APC open reading frame. Here we report on the detection by this assay of 5 germline mutations, 4 of which lie upstream of exon 15, where lesions appear to be sometimes difficult to detect by standard methods.

30852976
Molecular basis of familial adenomatous polyposis in the southeast of Brazil: identification of six novel mutations
Background:
        
      
      The goal of this study was to screen point mutations and deletions in APC and MUTYH genes in patients suspected of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in a Brazilian cohort.

15951963
A comparison of the phenotype and genotype in adenomatous polyposis patients with and without a family history
Objectives:
        
      
      Adenomatous polyposis of the colon is often secondary to an inherited mutation in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, however, approximately one third of patients have no family history of the disease. We studied the phenotype and genotype of adenomatous polyposis in patients without a family history.

27347161
Investigating polymorphisms by bioinformatics is a potential cost-effective method to screen for germline mutations in Chinese familial adenomatous polyposis patients
The aim of this study was to investigate germline mutations of the APC, MUTYH and AXIN2 genes in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and further assess the value of bioinformatics in screening the pathogenic changes predisposing to FAP. APC genes from 11 unrelated FAP patients in Yunnan province in China were firstly examined by exon-specific DNA sequencing. For samples without already known pathogenic changes predisposing to FAP in the APC gene, whole-gene sequencing of MUTYH and AXIN2 was performed. Mutational analysis of each gene was performed by bioinformatics. Eleven different types of APC polymorphisms were observed in the cohort of families analyzed. Of these polymorphisms, four were missense substitutions (V1822D, V1173G, P1760H and K2057), one was a nonsense substitution (S1196X), and six were silent substitutions (Y486Y, T449T, T1493T, G1678G, S1756S and P1960P). One missense mutation (Q335H) and two intronic substitutions (c.264+11G>A and c.420+35A>G) were detected in the MUTYH gene, and four synonymous mutations (I144I, P455P, P462P and L688L) and three intonic mutations (c.1060-77G>T, c.1060-287A>G and c.1060-282 A>G) of the AXIN2 gene were observed. In addition to the already reported pathogenic mutations, by using function assessment tools and databases, the synonymous substitutions observed in the APC gene of our samples were predicted to affect splicing regulation in the translation of mRNA, while the missense mutations observed in the APC gene and MUTYH gene were predicted to be disease-related polymorphisms; however, no functional effect of the mutations was observed in the AXIN2 gene. Comprehensive screening for germline mutations in APC, MUTYH and AXIN2 genes followed by prediction of pathogenicity using bioinformatic tools contributes to a cost-effective way of screening germline mutations in Chinese familial adenomatous polyposis patients.

8111410
Mutations of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene
Several investigators have reported germline mutations of the APC gene in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as well as somatic mutations in tumors developed in digestive organs (stomach, pancreas, colon, and rectum). Those results provide evidence that inactivation of the APC gene plays a significant role in FAP and in sporadic tumors of these tissues. APC mutations have led to some interesting observations. First, the great majority of the mutations found to date would result in truncation of the APC product. Second, almost all the mutations have occurred within the first half of the coding sequence, and somatic mutations in colorectal tumors are further clustered in a particular region called MCR (mutation cluster region). Third, most identified point mutations in the APC gene are transitions from cytosine to other nucleotides. Fourth, the location of germ-line mutations tends to correlate with the number of colorectal polyps in FAP patients. Furthermore, inactivation of both alleles of the APC gene seems to be required as an early event to develop most of adenomas and carcinomas in the colon and rectum as well as some of those in the stomach.

29406563
Spectrum of APC and MUTYH germ-line mutations in Russian patients with colorectal malignancies
Distribution of cancer-predisposing mutations demonstrates significant interethnic variations. This study aimed to evaluate patterns of APC and MUTYH germ-line mutations in Russian patients with colorectal malignancies. APC gene defects were identified in 26/38 (68%) subjects with colon polyposis; 8/26 (31%) APC mutations were associated with 2 known mutational hotspots (p.E1309Dfs*4 [n = 5] and p.Q1062fs* [n = 3]), while 6/26 (23%) mutations were novel (p.K73Nfs*6, p.S254Hfs*12, p.S1072Kfs*9, p.E1547Kfs*11, p.L1564X and p.C1263Wfs*22). Biallelic mutations in MUTYH gene were detected in 3/12 (25%) remaining subjects with polyposis and in 6/90 (6.7%) patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) carrying KRAS p.G12C substitution, but not in 231 early-onset CRC cases negative for KRAS p.G12C allele. In addition to known European founder alleles p.Y179C and p.G396D, this study revealed a recurrent character of MUTYH p.R245H germ-line mutation. Besides that, 3 novel pathogenic MUTYH alleles (p.L111P, p.R245S and p.Q293X) were found. Targeted next-generation sequencing of 7 APC/MUTYH mutation-negative DNA samples identified novel potentially pathogenic POLD1 variant (p.L460R) in 1 patient and known low-penetrant cancer-associated allele CHEK2 p.I157T in 3 patients. The analysis of 1120 healthy subjects revealed 15 heterozygous carriers of recurrent MUTYH mutations, thus the expected incidence of MUTYH-associated polyposis in Russia is likely to be 1:23 000.

14523376
Frequency and parental origin of de novo APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis
A predominance of de novo mutations in the paternal germ line has been reported for several disorders; however, in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), the parental origin of APC mutations has been scarcely analysed so far. Among 563 unrelated FAP families with known family history, we identified 58 patients with a suspected de novo mutation in the APC gene. A germline mutation was detected in 52 of them; in 38 patients, the mutation could be excluded in both parents. The five base pair deletion at codon 1309 (c.3927_3931delAAAGA) was over-represented in the group of patients with suspected de novo mutations (17/58=29%), when compared to the group of familial cases (26/505=5%); thus, the high frequency of this mutation is not due to a founder effect but rather due to de novo mutation events. Parental origin of de novo mutations could be traced in 16 families, including three families with large chromosomal deletions. Four mutations were of maternal and 12 of paternal origin, pointing to a moderate preponderance towards paternal origin. Sex-related differences of mutation types could be observed: large deletions and single-base substitutions were exclusively of paternal origin, whereas the small deletions were equally distributed (maternal/paternal ratio 4:4).

31062380
Clinical characterization and mutation spectrum in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis in China
Background and aim:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is the most common adenomatous polyposis syndrome. Patients with FAP are screened for germline mutations of two genes, APC and MUTYH. However, limited data exist on the clinical characterization and genotypic spectrum of FAP in China. This study was aimed to determine APC and MUTYH mutational status in a small cohort of FAP probands in China and to characterize the genotype-phenotype correlation in mutated patients.

20513532
Three novel mutations of the APC gene in Korean patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations within the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant disease predisposing individuals to colorectal cancer. Identification of APC mutations has important implications for genetic counseling and management of FAP patients. We examined the APC mutation status of 10 Korean FAP patients by polymerase chain reaction-direct sequencing method and found six APC mutations, including three novel mutations. Testing for MUTYH mutation was done for FAP patients in whom no mutation in the APC gene was identified. Three novel mutations (c.1654_1663delTCTTGGCGAG, c.3709C>T, and c.6092_6094delinsTT) and three previously reported mutations (c.3631_3632delAT, c.4438C>T, and c.4612_4613delGA) were detected. The MUTYH mutation was not detected in any of the four FAP patients without an APC mutation. This finding of three novel mutations in a group of Korean FAP patients broadens the spectrum of APC mutations.

16650078
Novel germline mutations in the APC gene of Cypriot patients with familial and sporadic adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is one of the two commonest familial syndromes that predispose to colorectal cancer. FAP is caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumour suppressor gene that has a high penetrance. The disease is characterized by the occurrence of hundreds to thousands of colorectal polyps, which if left untreated give rise to colorectal cancer. In Cyprus, there are no molecular data available as yet on families with FAP. This work presents the results of APC analysis in our population for the first time. The APC gene was analyzed in 33 DNA samples from 20 individuals belonging to four FAP families and 13 patients with sporadic polyposis. We identified three truncating mutations, four missense mutations and 11 polymorphisms. It is of interest that two of the three truncating mutations, 2307delA and Q1242X, are novel, which supports the existence of a unique genetic pool in the Cypriot population. This ethnic molecular study in addition to highlighting population heterogeneity also contributes to phenotype-genotype associations that are essential for the clinical management of FAP families in Cyprus.

22893084
Epiretinal membrane and retinal pigment epithelial lesions in a young child and detection of de novo APC mutation


28533537
Novel mutations and phenotypic associations identified through APC, MUTYH, NTHL1, POLD1, POLE gene analysis in Indian Familial Adenomatous Polyposis cohort
Colo-Rectal Cancer is a common cancer worldwide with 5-10% cases being hereditary. Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) syndrome is due to germline mutations in the APC or rarely MUTYH gene. NTHL1, POLD1, POLE have been recently reported in previously unexplained FAP cases. Unlike the Caucasian population, FAP phenotype and its genotypic associations have not been widely studied in several geoethnic groups. We report the first FAP cohort from South Asia and the only non-Caucasian cohort with comprehensive analysis of APC, MUTYH, NTHL1, POLD1, POLE genes. In this cohort of 112 individuals from 53 FAP families, we detected germline APC mutations in 60 individuals (45 families) and biallelic MUTYH mutations in 4 individuals (2 families). No NTHL1, POLD1, POLE mutations were identified. Fifteen novel APC mutations and a new Indian APC mutational hotspot at codon 935 were identified. Eight very rare FAP phenotype or phenotypes rarely associated with mutations outside specific APC regions were observed. APC genotype-phenotype association studies in different geo-ethnic groups can enrich the existing knowledge about phenotypic consequences of distinct APC mutations and guide counseling and risk management in different populations. A stepwise cost-effective mutation screening approach is proposed for genetic testing of south Asian FAP patients.

9452101
Detection of five novel germline mutations of the APC gene in Irish familial adenomatous polyposis families


8020934
Rapid detection of translation-terminating mutations at the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene by direct protein truncation test
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is usually associated with protein truncating mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The APC mutations are known to play a major role in colorectal carcinogenesis. For the identification of protein truncating mutations of the APC gene, we developed a rapid, sensitive, and direct screening procedure. The technique is based on the in vitro transcription and translation of the genomic PCR products and is called the protein truncation test. Samples of DNA from individual FAP patients, members of a FAP family, colorectal tumors, and colorectal tumor-derived cell lines were used to show the effectiveness of this method.

16088911
Mutation spectrum of the APC gene in 83 Korean FAP families
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a clinically well-defined hereditary disease caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. FAP is characterized by polyposis in the large bowel and variable extracolonic manifestations. With an increase of reported APC germline mutations, many reports have investigated genotype-phenotype correlations in FAP patients. Here, we analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 83 unrelated Korean FAP patients and investigated genotype-phenotype correlations. We identified germline APC mutations in 59 (71%) of the cases, including 34 frameshift mutations, 19 nonsense mutations, and six splice site mutations. Among 59 patients with the identified germline mutation of the APC gene, 37 had been reported previously and were included in the genotype-phenotype analysis. In the other 22 patients, we identified seven novel mutations: c.1438C>T, c.2232_2233dupCT, c.3426delT, c.3739_3769del31, c.3931_3935delATTGG, c.4332dupA, and c.4722_4725delACTA. Desmoid tumors were identified in six of the examined FAP patients, five of whom had APC germline mutations; these mutations involved codons 849, 864, 1309, 1444 and 1464, respectively (c.2547_2548delTA, c.2592_2593insCT, c.3927_3931delAAAGA, c.4332dupA and c.4391-4394delAGAG). Four of the included FAP patients had papillary thyroid cancers; all were female and had germline APC mutations (c.1863_1865delTTAincCT, c.2805C>A, c.3183_3187delACAAA and c.3927_3931delAAAGA).

10669993
Clinical features and genotype-phenotype correlations in 41 Italian families with adenomatosis coli
Background:
        
      
      Familial Adenomatous Polyposis in an autosomal dominant disease in which the large bowel is carpeted by polyps of various dimensions appearing during the second or third decade of life. Several extracolonic manifestations complete the clinical spectrum of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. If untreated, the disease leads invariably to colorectal cancer. The gene responsible for the disease, adenomatous Polyposis Coli, has been localized at chromosome 5q21.

9382065
Familial juvenile polyposis coli with APC gene mutation
Familial juvenile polyposis has been known to have malignant potential, but their genetic relation to familial adenomatous polyposis has not been proven yet. Two young brothers with intermittent rectal bleeding revealed multiple juvenile polyposis. Their father had a history of rectal cancer with multiple colonic polyps. Four frequent exons of APC gene mutation were tested from these patients' white blood cells by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and sequencing. The 21-yr-old brother had a missense mutation (GAA-->GGA) at codon 1309, whereas the 18-yr-old brother showed a missense mutation (ATA-->GTA) at codon 1304 in exon 15 of APC gene. Three of four first-degree relatives were affected with familial juvenile polyposis, familial juvenile polyposis with adenomatous change, and rectal cancer with multiple polyps. The APC gene mutation of familial juvenile polyposis in this case suggests a genetic relationship with familial adenomatous polyposis.

9288102
Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due to a hypermutable tract in APC
Approximately 130,000 cases of colorectal cancer (CRC) are diagnosed in the United States each year, and about 15% of these have a hereditary component. Two well-defined syndromes, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), account for up to 5% of the total new cases of CRC. Truncating APC mutations are responsible for FAP, and defective mismatch repair genes cause HNPCC. However, the genes responsible for most of the familial cases are unknown. Here we report a mutation (T to A at APC nucleotide 3920) found in 6% of Ashkenazi Jews and about 28% of Ashkenazim with a family history of CRC. Rather than altering the function of the encoded protein, this mutation creates a small hypermutable region of the gene, indirectly causing cancer predisposition.

10439961
Common origin of the I1307K APC polymorphism in Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi Jews
A common germline missense mutation within the APC gene, I1307K, has recently been described in Ashkenazi Jews. We detected this polymorphism in two non-Ashkenazi Jewish women using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), and hypothesized that in Jewish individuals it might not be restricted to Ashkenazim, and actually reflect a common ancestral polymorphism. To test this notion we performed allelic pattern determination using APC-linked markers in these two women and in nine Ashkenazi carrier controls. The pattern of the intragenic markers, as well as a single downstream marker 30-70 Kb from the APC gene was identical in all individuals, regardless of ethnic origin. We conclude that the I1307K polymorphism in Jewish individuals, is not restricted to Ashkenazim and probably reflects a founder mutation.

11267860
APC I1307K and E1317Q variants are rare or do not occur in Swedish colorectal cancer patients
Recently, a germ line mutation of the APC gene, I1307K, was discovered in a subset of Ashkenazi jews. The mutation involves an amino acid exchange and creates a tract consisting of eight contiguous adenosine residues believed to cause hypermutability in this region. Another germ line missense variant, E1317Q, not restricted to a certain ethnic population, could functionally alter the protein. These APC variants have been linked with increased colorectal cancer risk in several studies. However, they have not yet been investigated in Swedish colorectal cancer patients. Thus, our aim was to investigate the prevalence of I1307K and E1317Q in Swedish colorectal cancer patients in order to determine if these genetic variants are important predisposing factors to colorectal cancer in this population. To this end, sequence analysis was carried out of the APC gene in order to identify any I1307K and E1317Q variants in 106 unselected cases and 88 hereditary/familial colorectal cancer cases including 22 cases of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) fulfilling the Amsterdam criteria. Out of a total of 194 cases examined, we did not find any variants. It seems that these alterations are rare or absent in the Swedish population.

1338904
Somatic mutations of the APC gene in colorectal tumors: mutation cluster region in the APC gene
We examined somatic mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in 63 colorectal tumors (16 adenomas and 47 carcinomas) developed in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and non-FAP patients. In addition to loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the APC locus in 30 tumors, 43 other somatic mutations were detected. Twenty-one of them were point mutations; 16 nonsense and two missense mutations, and three occurred in introns at the splicing site. Twenty-two tumors had frameshift mutations due to deletion or insertion; nineteen of them were deletions of one to 31 bp and three were a 1-bp insertion. One tumor had a 1-bp deletion in an intron near the splicing site. Hence, 41 (95%) of 43 mutations resulted in truncation of the APC protein. Over 60% of the somatic mutations in the APC gene were clustered within a small region of exon 15, designated as MCR (mutation cluster region), which accounted for less than 10% of the coding region. Combining these data and the results of LOH, more than 80% of tumors (14 adenomas and 39 carcinomas) had at least one mutation in the APC gene, of which more than 60% (9 adenomas and 23 carcinomas) had two mutations. These results strongly suggest that somatic mutations of the APC gene are associated with development of a great majority of colorectal tumors.

31360874
Germline Pathogenic Variants in Homologous Recombination and DNA Repair Genes in an Asian Cohort of Young-Onset Colorectal Cancer
Background:
        
      
      Growing evidence suggests a role for cancer susceptibility genes such as BRCA2 and PALB2 in young-onset colorectal cancers. Using a cohort of young colorectal cancer patients, we sought to identify and provide functional evidence for germline pathogenic variants of DNA repair genes not typically associated with colorectal cancer.

8834176
Germline APC mutation (Gln1317) in a cancer-prone family that does not result in familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene are associated with the dominantly inherited syndrome of familial adenomatous polyposis. Somatic mutations in this gene are an early event in sporadic colorectal tumorigenesis. Here we report a family with genetic characteristics that do not conform exactly to either of these situations. The index case and three siblings presented with colorectal cancer, and another sibling had lung cancer. There was no evidence of colorectal cancer susceptibility in previous generations, although one case of gastric cancer was observed. Using restriction fragment length polymorphism, single-strand conformational polymorphism, and sequencing analysis, we screened each living family member for alterations in the mutation cluster region of exon 15 of the APC gene. A constitutional single base pair substitution at codon 1317 was observed in two of the siblings with colorectal cancer, but neither exhibited any colonic features typical of FAP nor an early onset of cancer. This constitutional change is a missense mutation and therefore does not result in the truncation of the APC protein, the most commonly observed result of mutation in this gene. We present evidence that this change is not a polymorphism and may be capable of conferring a growth advantage. This particular germline APC mutation does not completely cosegregate with cancer in this family; therefore, we conclude that another gene locus may be responsible for the increased cancer risk observed.

9724771
The APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors, but not always with a family history
Classical familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a high-penetrance autosomal dominant disease that predisposes to hundreds or thousands of colorectal adenomas and carcinoma and that results from truncating mutations in the APC gene. A variant of FAP is attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli, which results from germ-line mutations in the 5' and 3' regions of the APC gene. Attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli patients have "multiple" colorectal adenomas (typically fewer than 100) without the florid phenotype of classical FAP. Another group of patients with multiple adenomas has no mutations in the APC gene, and their phenotype probably results from variation at a locus, or loci, elsewhere in the genome. Recently, however, a missense variant of APC (I1307K) was described that confers an increased risk of colorectal tumors, including multiple adenomas, in Ashkenazim. We have studied a set of 164 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinoma and analyzed codons 1263-1377 (exon 15G) of the APC gene for germ-line variants. Three patients with the I1307K allele were detected, each of Ashkenazi descent. Four patients had a germ-line E1317Q missense variant of APC that was not present in controls; one of these individuals had an unusually large number of metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. There is increasing evidence that there exist germ-line variants of the APC gene that predispose to the development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinoma, but without the florid phenotype of classical FAP, and possibly with importance for colorectal cancer risk in the general population.

8395941
Identical APC exon 15 mutations result in a variable phenotype in familial adenomatous polyposis
Germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene result in familial adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), an inherited syndrome that predisposes affected individuals to early onset of colorectal cancer. Somatic APC mutations also have been detected in sporadic colon tumors. We have used single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis to scan a region of the APC gene that frequently is mutated in both APC and sporadic colorectal cancer. Four truncating mutations were found between codons 1060 and 1327 in 17 of 68 unrelated APC individuals. Fourteen of these persons carried either of two previously described five-nucleotide deletions which represent about 20% of APC mutations in these pedigrees. Patients with mutations in this region of exon 15 develop a classic APC colonic phenotype with multiple, diffuse adenomas developing by the second or third decade. However, the density of adenomas and the extracolonic disease manifestations associated with this syndrome are variable among individuals with identical APC mutations.

8381579
Mutational analysis of patients with adenomatous polyposis: identical inactivating mutations in unrelated individuals
Samples of constitutional DNA from 60 unrelated patients with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) were examined for mutations in the APC gene. Five inactivating mutations were observed among 12 individuals with APC; all were different from the six inactivating mutations previously reported in this panel of patients. The newly discovered mutations included single-nucleotide substitutions leading to stop codons and small deletions leading to frameshifts. Two of the mutations were observed in multiple APC families and in sporadic cases of APC; allele-specific PCR primers were designed for detecting mutations at these common sites. No missense mutations that segregated with the disease were found.

10746979
Molecular and clinical study of familial adenomatous polyposis for genetic testing and management
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer characterized by the development of numerous adenomatous polyps, predominantly in the colorectal region. Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis. We examined germline mutations of the APC gene and clinical features among eighty-seven individuals who consisted of thirty-nine FAP-patients, thirty-seven of their family members with a 1 in 2 risk of predisposition to this disease, and eleven normal persons. We accurately identified nine heterozygotes, among individuals with a 1 in 2 risk by genetic testing, without the uncertainty of the recurrence risk calculated by Bayes' theorem. Six of the nine heterozygotes were confirmed to have colorectal polyps by colonoscopic examination. Since they were diagnosed at 12.7 years-of-age on average, and were no more than 20 years old, they could be treated to prevent colorectal cancer. Based on the genotype-phenotype correlation, we concluded that the germline mutations responsible for the sparse polyps phenotype of FAP-patients tend to locate from codon 1055 in the proximal region of the APC gene, while those for the profuse type locate from codon 1102 in the distal region. Among the thirty-nine FAP-patients, we found that those with the germline mutations within codon 1055 and codon 1262 had colorectal carcinomas of an advanced stage, at a high rate (71.4%). Special attention and aggressive intervention is needed in these patients and relatives at risk. With reasonable and appropriate management, it should be possible to prolong and improve the quality of life of those family members both affected and at risk.

29212164
Targeted sequencing of established and candidate colorectal cancer genes in the Colon Cancer Family Registry Cohort
The underlying genetic cause of colorectal cancer (CRC) can be identified for 5-10% of all cases, while at least 20% of CRC cases are thought to be due to inherited genetic factors. Screening for highly penetrant mutations in genes associated with Mendelian cancer syndromes using next-generation sequencing (NGS) can be prohibitively expensive for studies requiring large samples sizes. The aim of the study was to identify rare single nucleotide variants and small indels in 40 established or candidate CRC susceptibility genes in 1,046 familial CRC cases (including both MSS and MSI-H tumor subtypes) and 1,006 unrelated controls from the Colon Cancer Family Registry Cohort using a robust and cost-effective DNA pooling NGS strategy. We identified 264 variants in 38 genes that were observed only in cases, comprising either very rare (minor allele frequency <0.001) or not previously reported (n=90, 34%) in reference databases, including six stop-gain, three frameshift, and 255 non-synonymous variants predicted to be damaging. We found novel germline mutations in established CRC genes MLH1, APC, and POLE, and likely pathogenic variants in cancer susceptibility genes BAP1, CDH1, CHEK2, ENG, and MSH3. For the candidate CRC genes, we identified likely pathogenic variants in the helicase domain of POLQ and in the LRIG1, SH2B3, and NOS1 genes and present their clinicopathological characteristics. Using a DNA pooling NGS strategy, we identified novel germline mutations in established CRC susceptibility genes in familial CRC cases. Further studies are required to support the role of POLQ, LRIG1, SH2B3 and NOS1 as CRC susceptibility genes.

7951218
Four novel germ-line mutations in the APC gene detected by heteroduplex analysis


32754334
Sporadic pediatric severe familial adenomatous polyposis: A case report
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant hereditary precancerous condition caused by germline pathogenetic variants in the tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Patients with FAP develop multiple gastrointestinal adenomatous polyps usually at the age of ~20 years, which, if untreated, become cancerous in 100% of cases. Genotype-phenotype associations have been extensively described; however, inter- and intra-familial variability exists. It is crucial to characterize the causative pathogenetic variant in each pedigree in order to develop a cancer prevention program and follow-up strategy for at-risk families. The present report describes a severe case of sporadic FAP that was diagnosed when the patient was ~2 years old. The patient was a carrier of the de novo pathogenic c.4132 C>T (p.Gln1378X) variant. Additionally, the patient was a carrier of the homozygous c.5465 T>A (p.Asp1822Val) polymorphism, inherited from both parents. However, it remains unclear whether or not this polymorphism is involved in the phenotypic manifestation. This case highlights the need to extend molecular screening to very young children when they show iron-deficiency, anaemia and/or rectal bleeding, even in the absence of a familial history of disease.

28283864
Lower gastrointestinal neuroendocrine neoplasms associated with hereditary cancer syndromes: a case series
Lower gastrointestinal (GI) neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) of the colon and rectum are uncommon and not traditionally associated with hereditary GI cancer syndromes. However, with widespread implementation of colorectal cancer screening programs, lower GI NENs are being identified with increasing frequency. We report the first case series of six patients with lower GI NENs who were diagnosed with hereditary GI cancer syndromes by germline testing. Two patients presented with poorly differentiated rectal neuroendocrine carcinoma (NECs) with colonic polyposis and were found to have Familial Adenomatous Polyposis and MYH-Associated Polyposis, respectively. Three patients with colorectal NENs (one well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, NET, and two NECs), all of which displayed abnormal immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins, were diagnosed with Lynch syndrome. One patient with a goblet cell carcinoid was diagnosed with CHEK2 mutations. All patients met genetic testing guidelines and the diagnosis was made utilizing next generation sequencing gene panel tests. Lower GI NETs should therefore be considered a potential hereditary GI cancer syndrome-associated malignancy in patients who otherwise meet criteria for genetic evaluation.

8103406
The APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene: a novel mutation in an FAP patient and a DdeI polymorphism in the 5' noncoding region


29368261
APC mosaicism in a young woman with desmoid type fibromatosis and familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is usually caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The classic form is characterized by hundreds to thousands of adenomas in the colorectum and early onset colorectal cancer (CRC) if left untreated. FAP is also associated with multiple extra-colonic manifestations such as gastroduodenal polyps, osteomas, epidermoid cysts, fibromas and desmoids. Most desmoid tumours in FAP patients occur intra-abdominally. Approximately 15-20% of the APC mutations are de novo mutations. Somatic mosaicism has been reported in some sporadic cases of polyposis but is probably an underestimated cause of the disease. This case report presents the detection of a mosaic APC mutation in a 26-year-old woman who as a child had been diagnosed with desmoid type fibromatosis. FAP was suggested when she presented with extensive extra abdominal fibromatosis. Our findings indicate that APC mutations may be suspected in patients presenting with a desmoid regardless of its location. If there is clinical evidence that the patient has FAP, adenomas and colonic mucosa in addition to leukocyte DNA should be included in the screening, preferably using methods that are more sensitive than Sanger sequencing.

10713886
APC mutation and phenotypic spectrum of Singapore familial adenomatous polyposis patients
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a familial form of colon cancer caused by mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Although the APC gene has been extensively studied in the Caucasian population, it has not been previously described in the Chinese population. In the present study, we investigated APC mutation and phenotypic spectrum in the Singapore FAP families who are predominantly Chinese. The protein truncation test (PTT) was used to screen the entire APC gene for germline mutations in 28 unrelated families. Fifteen different mutations were identified in 22 families. Eight mutations were 1-11 basepair deletions or insertions; three involved deletions of whole exons and four were nonsense mutations. Nine of the mutations, including two complex rearrangements, are novel. Eight families including three de novo cases have the same (AAAGA) deletion at codon 1309, indicating that like the Western families, codon 1309 is also the mutation 'hot spot' for Singapore FAP families. In contrast, we did not find any mutation in codon 1061, the second hot spot for the Western population. Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) is consistently associated with the prescribed domain (codons 463 to 1387) and is the only phenotype with no intra-family variation. Other than CHRPE, differences in the type and frequency of extracolonic manifestations within the FAP families suggest the influence of modifying genes and environmental factors.

33790997
APC c.4621C>T variant causing Gardner's syndrome in a Han Chinese family may be inherited through maternal mosaicism
Gardner's syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary disease that is characterized by multiple colorectal polyps combined with extra-colonic presentation (such as osteoma or desmoid tumors) of familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. Gardner's syndrome is caused by the mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, which is located at 5q21. The aim of the current study was to investigate the APC gene mutations present in a Han Chinese family diagnosed with Gardner's syndrome. The 38-year-old proband presented with clinical symptoms, and was later diagnosed with Gardner's syndrome. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral venous blood of 150 normal controls as well as the family members of the proband. Analysis of the respective APC gene sequences was performed using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing. Pathogenesis associated with the APC mutation was investigated using reverse-transcription quantitative PCR and determined through bioinformatics approaches. Haplotype analysis was performed to identify the genetic source of the mutation(s). In the initial screening for APC variants, the APC c.4621C>T variant was detected in the proband and his son, but was not detected in the proband's affected mother. The mRNA expression changed significantly according to age and the presence of the mutation in the blood of the patients. Haplotype analysis suggested the presence of maternal mosaicism for this mutation. Haplotype analysis revealed that the APC c.4621C>T variant in a patient with Gardner's syndrome was most likely derived from his mother through mosaicism. These results indicate the necessity to verify the possibility of gonadal mosaicism when a proband diagnosed with Gardner's syndrome appears to exhibit a de novo mutation.

32281046
Highly aggressive thoracic desmoid tumors in adolescent siblings with fatal outcomes in an FAP kindred: a need for increased vigilance and intervention in at-risk AYAs
Desmoid tumors are a manifestation of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), associated with mutation of the APC gene. Although considered benign tumors, desmoids can be aggressive and cause considerable morbidity. Known risk factors for desmoid tumor growth include location of mutations within the APC gene, family history of desmoid tumors, previous surgery, female gender, and pregnancy. Desmoids occur at diverse sites, commonly within the abdomen or at sites of previous surgery; thoracic desmoids are relatively uncommon. Reported here is a highly desmoid tumor-prone FAP family with a truncating mutation in the APC gene at codon 1550 (c.4648G>T) in which female siblings developed remarkably similar thoracic desmoids with highly aggressive tumor behavior during the onset of puberty, throughout adolescence, and in one sibling during and following pregnancy. Both siblings had a fatal outcome. This case underscores the potential for aggressive behavior of desmoids during adolescence and the need for close vigilance during the adolescent and young adult (AYA) age range in desmoid-prone FAP kindreds.

19617769
APC somatic mosaicism in a patient with Gardner syndrome carrying the E1573X mutation: report of a case
We report a case of somatic APC mosaicism in an person with a clinical diagnosis of Gardner syndrome with features of attenuated polyposis coli and with an uninformative family history. In initial screening for APC mutations, the germline mutation E1573X was detected in a lower proportion than that predicted by a heterozygous mutation indicating the presence of somatic mosaicism. Pyrosequencing confirmed this hypothesis and quantified the presence of the mutation in approximately 18% of the blood lymphocytes. Mutational analysis performed in the offspring revealed a fully heterozygous E1573X mutation in 2 of the 3 individuals tested. The milder colonic phenotype exhibited by the index patient could be a consequence of the presence of the mosaicism in the colon mucosa. The detection of the mutation in other tissues and in the offspring suggests that it may have occurred early during embryogenesis, before the separation of the embryonic layers. The E1573X mutation is the most distal mutation in the APC sequence reported to date as a mosaic and, interestingly, in the context of Gardner syndrome with extensive extracolonic features. Mosaicism is an important consequence of de novo APC mutations and it should be considered in the management of apparently sporadic or de novo cases, particularly in the evaluation of the risk of siblings and offspring.

18026870
Gonadal mosaicism and familial adenomatous polyposis
De novo mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are estimated to constitute approximately 25% of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) cases. A small percentage of these arise in the mosaic form, affecting only a subset of cells in the affected individual. A family is described here whereby an unaffected mother with no detectible mutation in APC, transmitted the identical APC c.4729G>T (p.Glu1577X) mutation to two children. A third child, with the same APC allelic haplotype received a normal APC allele, suggesting that the mutation originated in the gonadal tissues of the mother. These results underscore the utility of mutation-specific genetic testing for the parents and siblings of a proband of an adult-onset disease, even if the proband appears to have a de novo mutation. Parents who test negative for the mutation should be counseled about the possibility of having another affected child due to gonadal mosaicism.

23561487
Mutational spectrum of the APC and MUTYH genes and genotype-phenotype correlations in Brazilian FAP, AFAP, and MAP patients
Background:
        
      
      Patients with multiple colorectal adenomas are currently screened for germline mutations in two genes, APC and MUTYH. APC-mutated patients present classic or attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP/AFAP), while patients carrying biallelic MUTYH mutations exhibit MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP). The spectrum of mutations as well as the genotype-phenotype correlations in polyposis syndromes present clinical impact and can be population specific, making important to obtain genetic and clinical data from different populations.

18393246
[Germline mutation of adenomatous polyposis coli gene in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis]
Objective:
        
      
      To explore the characteristics of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene germline mutations in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).

26163615
Analysis of Small Fragment Deletions of the APC gene in Chinese Patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis, a Precancerous Condition
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease mainly caused by mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene with almost complete penetrance. These colorectal polyps are precancerous lesions that will inevitable develop into colorectal cancer at the median age of 40-year old if total proctocolectomy is not performed. So identification of APC germline mutations has great implications for genetic counseling and management of FAP patients. In this study, we screened APC germline mutations in Chinese FAP patients, in order to find novel mutations and the APC gene germline mutation characteristics of Chinese FAP patients.

16569251
Single nucleotide polymorphisms of the APC gene and colorectal cancer risk: a case-control study in Taiwan
Background:
        
      
      Colorectal cancer (CRC), which has become especially prevalent in developed countries, is currently the third highest cause of cancer mortality in Taiwan. Mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a tumour suppressor, is thought to be an early event in colorectal tumourigenesis. To date, however, no large-scale screening for APC gene variants in Chinese subjects has been performed. The present study was undertaken to identify APC gene variants that are significantly associated with the occurrence of CRC in Taiwanese subjects.

29535845
Identification and characterization of a novel adenomatous polyposis coli mutation in adult pancreatoblastoma
During next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis, many missense mutations were found in a well-known oncogene, many of which were variant of uncertain significance mutations. We recently treated an adult patient with pancreatoblastoma by chemotherapy. Using an NGS cancer panel, we found a previously unreported missense mutation in the 1835 codon of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. We also found a heterogeneous mutation in the 1835 codon of the APC gene in the patient's germline by Sanger sequencing. Although this patient did not have a history of familial adenomatous polyposis, functional analysis suggested the R1835G mutant APC showed attenuated repression of Wnt/β-catenin signaling activity. This is the first report showing a novel APC missense mutation involved in the onset of adult pancreatoblastoma.

9669663
Novel germline APC variants in patients with multiple adenomas
Chain-terminating germline APC mutations are responsible for adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). In the present work, we tested the hypothesis that germline APC mutations may be present in some patients with a milder phenotype, i.e., multiple synchronous colorectal adenomas. Eighteen patients with 3 or more colorectal adenomas at endoscopy (within a 6-month period) were ascertained from a series of subjects undergoing endoscopic examination. Their blood DNAs were analysed for the presence of germline mutations in the APC coding region by single-strand polymorphism analysis. Ten unrelated polyp-free subjects and 101 unrelated APC patients were used as controls in the molecular analyses. Five of the eighteen patients carried novel germline APC variants or rare polymorphisms. These were various in site (from the splice acceptor site of intron 7 to the end of exon 15) and type (splice-site, missense, and chain-terminating mutations). Only one of ten polyp-free individuals carried a silent APC variant and none of these variants was found in the 101 APC controls. A first- or second-degree family history of colorectal cancer was reported by 4 of the 5 patients carrying a germline APC variant. In conclusion, novel APC germline variants were detected in patients with multiple synchronous adenomas. This suggests that the development of sporadic adenomas, in some instances, is associated with the presence of minor germline variants of the APC gene and that the spectrum of germline APC functional mutations may be larger than previously thought.

14966376
Genetic analysis of the APC gene in Taiwanese familial adenomatous polyposis
Colorectal cancer has become the third leading cause of death from cancer in Taiwan. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease characterized by the presence of multiple adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum. The gene responsible for FAP (APC) was cloned in 1991. Extensive analyses of the mutation spectra in FAP kindreds have been performed in different countries, but the results have been highly variable (30-80%). In this study, we used denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) followed by automatic sequencing in an effort to establish the mutation spectrum of APC from DNA of peripheral blood cells. Among the 6 FAP probands analyzed, mutations were detected in 3 (50%), 2 of which were novel. The first novel mutation was at codon 2166, with a C to T transition, resulting in a stop codon. The second novel mutation was at codon 1971, with a C to G transversion, resulting in an amino acid change from serine to cysteine. The third mutation involved an A insertion in the sequence of -AAAAAA- at codons 1554-1556, which created a downstream stop codon (codon 1558). This study is the first to report mutation analysis in Taiwanese FAP probands.

12503191
Germline mutations of the APC gene in two Japanese adenomatous polyposis patients
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene have been reported in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and are believed to be an early event in colorectal carcinoma. We report the results of screening for germline mutations of the APC gene in 4 cases of 2 kindreds using non-radioactive PCR-SSCP (polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism) analysis. The mutation in kindred 1 was a 4 bp deletion at codon 849 in exon 15, resulting in a frameshift leading to truncation of the APC gene product. In kindred 2, a transversion of C to G at codon 2038 was observed, resulting in an amino acid change from leucine to valine. In this case, it is possible to screen presymptomatic diagnosis easily and quickly by digestion with restriction enzyme EcoNI.

30148152
Must Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients have the LKB1/STK11 gene mutation? A case report and review of the literature
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease, which is characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation and multiple gastrointestinal hamartoma polyps. The germline mutation of LKB1/STK11 gene on chromosome 19p13.3 is considered to be the hereditary cause of PJS. However, must a patient with PJS have the LKB1/STK11 gene mutation? We here report a case of a male patient who had typical manifestations of PJS and a definite family history, but did not have LKB1/STK11 gene mutation. By means of high-throughput sequencing technology, only mutations in APC gene (c.6662T > C: p.Met2221Thr) and MSH6 gene (c.3488A > T: p.Glu1163Val) were detected. The missense mutations in APC and MSH6 gene may lead to abnormalities in structure and function of their expression products, and may result in the occurrence of PJS. This study suggests that some other genetic disorders may cause PJS besides LKB1/STK11 gene mutation.

22799487
A novel SYBR-based duplex qPCR for the detection of gene dosage: detection of an APC large deletion in a familial adenomatous polyposis patient with an unusual phenotype
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome caused by a loss of function of the APC gene. Large deletions in APC are a common cause of FAP; despite the existence of a variety of gene dosage detection methodologies, most are labor intensive and time and resource consuming.

31980526
Precision medicine integrating whole-genome sequencing, comprehensive metabolomics, and advanced imaging
Genome sequencing has established clinical utility for rare disease diagnosis. While increasing numbers of individuals have undergone elective genome sequencing, a comprehensive study surveying genome-wide disease-associated genes in adults with deep phenotyping has not been reported. Here we report the results of a 3-y precision medicine study with a goal to integrate whole-genome sequencing with deep phenotyping. A cohort of 1,190 adult participants (402 female [33.8%]; mean age, 54 y [range 20 to 89+]; 70.6% European) had whole-genome sequencing, and were deeply phenotyped using metabolomics, advanced imaging, and clinical laboratory tests in addition to family/medical history. Of 1,190 adults, 206 (17.3%) had at least 1 genetic variant with pathogenic (P) or likely pathogenic (LP) assessment that suggests a predisposition of genetic risk. A multidisciplinary clinical team reviewed all reportable findings for the assessment of genotype and phenotype associations, and 137 (11.5%) had genotype and phenotype associations. A high percentage of genotype and phenotype associations (>75%) was observed for dyslipidemia (n = 24), cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, and other cardiac diseases (n = 42), and diabetes and endocrine diseases (n = 17). A lack of genotype and phenotype associations, a potential burden for patient care, was observed in 69 (5.8%) individuals with P/LP variants. Genomics and metabolomics associations identified 61 (5.1%) heterozygotes with phenotype manifestations affecting serum metabolite levels in amino acid, lipid and cofactor, and vitamin pathways. Our descriptive analysis provides results on the integration of whole-genome sequencing and deep phenotyping for clinical assessments in adults.

15300854
RNA analysis reveals splicing mutations and loss of expression defects in MLH1 and BRCA1
The classical paradigm of mutation screening seeks to relate alterations in DNA sequence to their effect at the protein level. However, the majority of missense mutations are problematic as their pathological significance is often unclear. In order to test the hypothesis that many missense mutations primarily cause defects at the RNA rather than the protein level, we have performed retrospective RNA analysis of 12 individuals carrying missense mutations in the cancer predisposition genes APC, BRCA1, BRCA2, MLH1, and MSH2. RNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and RT-PCR performed in order to assess the splicing and expression of the mutant allele in each case. Four of the 12 missense mutations analysed were associated with RNA defects. We detected two cases of exon skipping and one case of partial intron inclusion with activation of a cryptic intronic splice site in MLH1. A fourth case was associated with monoallelic expression of BRCA1. In addition, allele-specific analysis of common coding polymorphisms identified a further case of monoallelic BRCA1 expression in one of two individuals who had previously screened as mutation-negative. Although we were unable to identify the underlying cause of this loss of expression, it strongly suggests the presence of a pathogenic defect in BRCA1 in this case, highlighting the use of allelic expression studies as a method of mutation scanning. Finally, we used our dataset to test the ability of several in silico sequence analysis tools to identify splicing defects. Our results suggest that a significant number of missense mutations in cancer predisposition genes are associated with defects of RNA splicing, and that the use of gene- and splice site prediction software can aid in identifying such mutations.

11768389
A novel 3' mutation in the APC gene in a family presenting with a desmoid tumour


31175295
Comprehensive analysis of coding variants highlights genetic complexity in developmental and epileptic encephalopathy
Although there are many known Mendelian genes linked to epileptic or developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (EE/DEE), its genetic architecture is not fully explained. Here, we address this incompleteness by analyzing exomes of 743 EE/DEE cases and 2366 controls. We observe that damaging ultra-rare variants (dURVs) unique to an individual are significantly overrepresented in EE/DEE, both in known EE/DEE genes and the other non-EE/DEE genes. Importantly, enrichment of dURVs in non-EE/DEE genes is significant, even in the subset of cases with diagnostic dURVs (P = 0.000215), suggesting oligogenic contribution of non-EE/DEE gene dURVs. Gene-based analysis identifies exome-wide significant (P = 2.04 × 10-6) enrichment of damaging de novo mutations in NF1, a gene primarily linked to neurofibromatosis, in infantile spasm. Together with accumulating evidence for roles of oligogenic or modifier variants in severe neurodevelopmental disorders, our results highlight genetic complexity in EE/DEE, and indicate that EE/DEE is not an aggregate of simple Mendelian disorders.

32369273
Consecutive medical exome analysis at a tertiary center: Diagnostic and health-economic outcomes
The utility of whole exome analysis has been extensively demonstrated in research settings, but its clinical utility as a first-tier genetic test has not been well documented from diagnostic and health economic standpoints in real-life clinical settings. We performed medical exome analyses focusing on a clinically interpretable portion of the genome (4,813 genes) as a first-tier genetic test for 360 consecutive patients visiting a genetics clinic at a tertiary children's hospital in Japan, over a 3-year period. Bioinformatics analyses were conducted using standard software. A molecular diagnosis was made in 171 patients involving a total of 107 causative genes. Among these 107 causative genes, 57 genes were classified as genes with potential organ-specific interventions and management strategies. Clinically relevant results were obtained in 26% of the total cohort and 54% of the patients with a definitive molecular diagnosis. Performing the medical exome analysis at the time of the initial visit to the tertiary center, rather than after visits to pertinent specialists, brain MRI examination, and G-banded chromosome testing, would have reduced the financial cost by 197 euros according to retrospective calculation under multiple assumption. The present study demonstrated a high diagnostic yield (47.5%) for singleton medical exome analysis as a first-tier test in a real-life setting. Medical exome analysis yielded clinically relevant information in a quarter of the total patient cohort. The application of genomic testing during the initial visit to a tertiary medical center could be a rational approach to the diagnosis of patients with suspected genetic disorders.

31591141
Gastric polyposis and desmoid tumours as a new familial adenomatous polyposis clinical variant associated with APC mutation at the extreme 3'-end
Germline mutations of the APC gene, which encodes a multidomain protein of 2843 amino acid residues, cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Three FAP clinical variants are correlated with the location of APC mutations: (1) classic FAP with profuse polyposis (>1000 adenomas), associated with mutations from codon 1250 to 1424; (2) attenuated FAP (<100 adenomas), associated with mutations at APC extremities (before codon 157 and after codon 1595); (3) classic FAP with intermediate colonic polyposis (100-1000 adenomas), associated with mutations located in the remaining part of APC In an effort to decipher the clinical phenotype associated with APC C-terminal germline truncating mutations in patients with FAP, after screening APC mutations in one family whose members (n=4) developed gastric polyposis, colon oligo-polyposis and desmoid tumours, we performed a literature meta-analysis of clinically characterised patients (n=97) harbouring truncating mutations in APC C-terminus. The APC distal mutations identified in this study cluster with a phenotype characterised by colon oligo-polyposis, diffuse gastric polyposis and desmoid tumours. In conclusion, we describe a novel FAP clinical variant, which we propose to refer to as Gastric Polyposis and Desmoid FAP, that may require tailored management.

24082139
Personalized genomic disease risk of volunteers
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is commonly used for researching the causes of genetic disorders. However, its usefulness in clinical practice for medical diagnosis is in early development. In this report, we demonstrate the value of NGS for genetic risk assessment and evaluate the limitations and barriers for the adoption of this technology into medical practice. We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on 81 volunteers, and for each volunteer, we requested personal medical histories, constructed a three-generation pedigree, and required their participation in a comprehensive educational program. We limited our clinical reporting to disease risks based on only rare damaging mutations and known pathogenic variations in genes previously reported to be associated with human disorders. We identified 271 recessive risk alleles (214 genes), 126 dominant risk alleles (101 genes), and 3 X-recessive risk alleles (3 genes). We linked personal disease histories with causative disease genes in 18 volunteers. Furthermore, by incorporating family histories into our genetic analyses, we identified an additional five heritable diseases. Traditional genetic counseling and disease education were provided in verbal and written reports to all volunteers. Our report demonstrates that when genome results are carefully interpreted and integrated with an individual's medical records and pedigree data, NGS is a valuable diagnostic tool for genetic disease risk.

26161710
Novel Missense Mutation at Codon 2774 (C.8321 G>A) p.S2774N of APC Gene in a Denovo Case of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease caused by germline mutation in Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene. FAP accounts less than 1% of all colorectal cancers incidence. Patients generally present hundreds to thousands of adenomas in colon and rectum and develop colorectal cancer by age 35 - 40 if left untreated. A milder form of FAP with fewer numbers of polyps (< 100) is Attenuated FAP (AFAP) and in comparison with classical FAP, it usually diagnosed at an older age. Approximately 15% - 20% of FAP patients are ''de novo'' cases without any family history of the disease and novel APC mutations account for approximately 25% of FAP cases. In our study, we reported a novel missense mutation at the APC gene in a denovo patient with AFAP like phenotype.

28608266
Potentially pathogenic germline CHEK2 c.319+2T>A among multiple early-onset cancer families
To study the potential contribution of genes other than BRCA1/2, PTEN, and TP53 to the biological and clinical characteristics of multiple early-onset cancers in Norwegian families, including early-onset breast cancer, Cowden-like and Li-Fraumeni-like syndromes (BC, CSL and LFL, respectively). The Hereditary Cancer Biobank from the Norwegian Radium Hospital was used to identify early-onset BC, CSL or LFL for whom no pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2, PTEN, or TP53 had been found in routine diagnostic DNA sequencing. Forty-four cancer susceptibility genes were selected and analyzed by our in-house designed TruSeq amplicon-based assay for targeted sequencing. Protein- and RNA splicing-dedicated in silico analyses were performed for all variants of unknown significance (VUS). Variants predicted as the more likely to affect splicing were experimentally analyzed by minigene assay. We identified a CSL individual carrying a variant in CHEK2 (c.319+2T>A, IVS2), here considered as likely pathogenic. Out of the five VUS (BRCA2, CDH1, CHEK2, MAP3K1, NOTCH3) tested in the minigene splicing assay, only NOTCH3 c.14090C>T (p.Ser497Leu) showed a significant effect on RNA splicing, notably by inducing partial skipping of exon 9. Among 13 early-onset BC, CSL and LFL patients, gene panel sequencing identified a potentially pathogenic variant in CHEK2 that affects a canonical RNA splicing signal. Our study provides new information on genetic loci that may affect the risk of developing cancer in these patients and their families, demonstrating that genes presently not routinely tested in molecular diagnostic settings may be important for capturing cancer predisposition in these families.

33977078
Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma in Lynch/Muir-Torre Syndrome with Germline Pathogenic Variant in MSH6 and Molecular Analysis: Report of a Case and Review of the Literature
Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder due to pathogenic variations in the mismatch repair genes, which predisposes to malignancies, most commonly colon and endometrial carcinoma. Muir-Torre syndrome is a subset of LS with cutaneous sebaceous adenoma and keratoacanthoma in addition to the malignancies. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in patients with LS is extremely rare. Only 26 cases have been reported and among them, only two cases of papillary RCC. We report a case of synchronous papillary RCC and colonic adenocarcinoma in an 85-year-old male with Lynch/Muir-Torre syndrome. The LS was diagnosed when he presented with multiple sebaceous adenomas and genetic testing showed a pathogenic variant in MSH6 mismatch repair gene. A colonoscopy at that time showed multiple tubular adenomas with high-grade dysplasia. He was lost to follow-up and presented with gastrointestinal bleeding after 20 years. A right colonic mass, and a solid mass in the lower pole of the right kidney, was detected by imaging. Right Colectomy showed a T3N0 mucin-producing adenocarcinoma. Right nephrectomy showed a T3a papillary RCC which was microsatellite stable with MSH6, and KRAS mutation. The 36-month follow-up exams showed additional sebaceous neoplasms, and an absence of metastatic carcinoma. Analysis of the reported cases of RCC in LS show clear cell RCC as the most common type. These tumors showed MLH1 mutation most commonly, unlike the urothelial malignancies in LS which involve MSH2. Among the 4 cases of RCC with MSH6 mutation, three were in females, indicating some gender differences.

20682701
The genetic basis of colorectal cancer in a population-based incident cohort with a high rate of familial disease
Background and aims:
        
      
      Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most frequent cancer in developed countries. Newfoundland has the highest incidence of CRC in Canada and the highest rate of familial CRC yet reported in the world. To determine the impact of mutations in known CRC susceptibility genes and the contribution of the known pathways to the development of hereditary CRC, an incident cohort of 750 patients with CRC (708 different families) from the Newfoundland population was studied.

24599579
The UMD-APC database, a model of nation-wide knowledge base: update with data from 3,581 variations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare autosomal-inherited disease that highly predisposes to colorectal cancer, characterized by a diffuse duodenal and colorectal polyposis associated with various extradigestive tumors and linked to germline mutations within the APC gene. A French consortium of laboratories involved in APC mutation screening has progressively improved the description of the variation spectrum, inferred functional significance of nontruncating variations, and delineated phenotypic characteristics of the disease. The current version of the UMD-APC database is described here. The total number of variations has risen to 5,453 representing 1,473 distinct variations. The published records initially registered into the database were extended with 3,581 germline variations found through genetic testing performed by the eight licensed laboratories belonging to the French APC network. Sixty six of 149 variations of previously unknown significance have now been classified as (likely) causal or neutral. The database is available on the Internet (http://www.umd.be/APC/) and updated twice per year according to the consensus rules of the network. The UMD-APC database is thus expected to facilitate functional classification of rare synonymous, nonsynonymous, and intronic mutations and consequently improve genetic counseling and medical care in FAP families.

32067438
Identification of a Novel Splice Variant (c.423-8A>G) of APC by RNA Sequencing


15771908
Founder mutation in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in the Balearic Islands
The incidence of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is approximately 7.4 per 100,000 inhabitants. APC gene mutations have been found in 60-70% of all FAP families, codons 1309 (20%) and 1061 (8%) being known hot-spots. We searched for mutations in the APC gene in a population-based registry of FAP from the Spanish Balearic Islands. Fifty-one members of 12 FAP families registered in the Balearic Islands Cancer Registry were studied; three of them were de novo cases. Mutations in the APC gene were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and sequencing. Haplotype was established by combining intra- and extragenic markers. Mutations in the APC gene were detected in 10 out of 12 (83%) families analyzed. Six families shared the same mutation, a 5-bp deletion at codon 1061 (c.3221_3225delACAAA). Five of the families containing this mutation shared the same haplotype and originated in the same geographic area. The codon 1061 mutation in the APC gene is the most common one in the Balearic Islands. Although this codon is a hot-spot, the haplotype analysis of these families is consistent for the presence of a founder effect of the 5-bp deletion at codon 1061 in FAP families in the Spanish Balearic Islands.

10598803
The identical 5' splice-site acceptor mutation in five attenuated APC families from Newfoundland demonstrates a founder effect
Inherited mutations of the APC gene predispose carriers to multiple adenomatous polyps of the colon and rectum and to colorectal cancer. Mutations located at the extreme 5' end of the APC gene, however, are associated with a less severe disease known as attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC). Many individuals with AAPC develop relatively few colorectal polyps but are still at high risk for colorectal cancer. We report here the identification of a 5' APC germline mutation in five separately ascertained AAPC families from Newfoundland, Canada. This disease-causing mutation is a single basepair change (G to A) in the splice-acceptor region of APC intron 3 that creates a mutant RNA without exon 4 of APC. The observation of the same APC mutation in five families from the same geographic area demonstrates a founder effect. Furthermore, the identification of this germline mutation strengthens the correlation between the 5' location of an APC disease-causing mutation and the attenuated polyposis phenotype.

32829589
A Novel Splice Variant (c.438T>A) of APC, Suspected by Family History and Confirmed by RNA Sequencing


22431159
Deep intronic APC mutations explain a substantial proportion of patients with familial or early-onset adenomatous polyposis
To uncover pathogenic deep intronic variants in patients with colorectal adenomatous polyposis, in whom no germline mutation in the APC or MUTYH genes can be identified by routine diagnostics, we performed a systematic APC messenger RNA analysis in 125 unrelated mutation-negative cases. Overall, we identified aberrant transcripts in 8% of the patients (familial cases 30%; early-onset manifestation 21%). In eight of them, two different out-of-frame pseudoexons were found consisting of a 167-bp insertion from intron 4 in five families with a shared founder haplotype and a 83-bp insertion from intron 10 in three patients. The pseudoexon formation was caused by three different heterozygous germline mutations, which are supposed to activate cryptic splice sites. In conclusion, a few deep intronic mutations contribute substantially to the APC mutation spectrum. Complementary DNA analysis and/or target sequencing of intronic regions should be considered as an additional mutation discovery approach in polyposis patients.

26247049
Splicing analysis for exonic and intronic mismatch repair gene variants associated with Lynch syndrome confirms high concordance between minigene assays and patient RNA analyses
A subset of DNA variants causes genetic disease through aberrant splicing. Experimental splicing assays, either RT-PCR analyses of patient RNA or functional splicing reporter minigene assays, are required to evaluate the molecular nature of the splice defect. Here, we present minigene assays performed for 17 variants in the consensus splice site regions, 14 exonic variants outside these regions, and two deep intronic variants, all in the DNA mismatch-repair (MMR) genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2, associated with Lynch syndrome. We also included two deep intronic variants in APC and PKD2. For one variant (MLH1 c.122A>G), our minigene assay and patient RNA analysis could not confirm the previously reported aberrant splicing. The aim of our study was to further investigate the concordance between minigene splicing assays and patient RNA analyses. For 30 variants results from patient RNA analyses were available, either performed by our laboratory or presented in literature. Some variants were deliberately included in this study because they resulted in multiple aberrant transcripts in patient RNA analysis, or caused a splice effect other than the prevalent exon skip. While both methods were completely concordant in the assessment of splice effects, four variants exhibited major differences in aberrant splice patterns. Based on the present and earlier studies, together showing an almost 100% concordance of minigene assays with patient RNA analyses, we discuss the weight given to minigene splicing assays in the current criteria proposed by InSiGHT for clinical classification of MMR variants.

19196998
Analysis of rare APC variants at the mRNA level: six pathogenic mutations and literature review
In monogenic disorders, the functional evaluation of rare, unclassified variants helps to assess their pathogenic relevance and can improve differential diagnosis and predictive testing. We characterized six rare APC variants in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis at the mRNA level. APC variants c.531 + 5G>C and c.532-8G>A in intron 4, c.1409-2_1409delAGG in intron 10, c.1548G>A in exon 11, and a large duplication of exons 10 and 11 result in a premature stop codon attributable to aberrant transcripts whereas the variant c.1742A>G leads to the in-frame deletion of exon 13 and results in the removal of a functional motif. Mutation c.1548G>A was detected in the index patient but not in his affected father, suggesting mutational mosaicism. A literature review shows that most of the rare APC variants detected by routine diagnostics and further analyzed at the transcript level were evaluated as pathogenic. The majority of rare APC variants, particularly those located close to exon-intron boundaries, could be classified as pathogenic because of aberrant splicing. Our study shows that the characterization of rare variants at the mRNA level is crucial for the evaluation of pathogenicity and underlying mutational mechanisms, and could lead to better treatment modalities.

27683109
Pseudoexons provide a mechanism for allele-specific expression of APC in familial adenomatous polyposis
Allele-specific expression (ASE) of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene occurs in up to one-third of families with adenomatous polyposis (FAP) that have screened mutation-negative by conventional techniques. To advance our understanding of the genomic basis of this phenomenon, 54 APC mutation-negative families (21 with classical FAP and 33 with attenuated FAP, AFAP) were investigated. We focused on four families with validated ASE and scrutinized these families by sequencing of the blood transcriptomes (RNA-seq) and genomes (WGS). Three families, two with classical FAP and one with AFAP, revealed deep intronic mutations associated with pseudoexons. In all three families, intronic mutations (c.646-1806T>G in intron 6, c.1408+729A>G in intron 11, and c.1408+731C>T in intron 11) created new splice donor sites resulting in the insertion of intronic sequences (of 127 bp, 83 bp, and 83 bp, respectively) in the APC transcript. The respective intronic mutations were absent in the remaining polyposis families and the general population. Premature stop of translation as the predicted consequence as well as co-segregation with polyposis supported the pathogenicity of the pseudoexons. We conclude that next generation sequencing on RNA and genomic DNA is an effective strategy to reveal and validate pseudoexons that are regularly missed by traditional screening methods and is worth considering in apparent mutation-negative polyposis families.

12362034
A novel aberrant splice site mutation in the APC gene


27081559
A novel APC mosaicism in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis
Using next-generation sequencing (NGS) to analyze a patient with sporadic familial adenomatous polyposis in whom no APC mutations were found by Sanger sequencing, we identified a novel APC mosaicism at a spliced donor site (c.834+2 T>C) in his leukocytes, normal colonic mucosa and adenoma. The detection of APC mosaicism using NGS can be useful in providing appropriate genetic counseling and surveillance of at risk family members as well as the proband.

8844222
Four novel germline mutations of the APC gene


26625971
Novel and reported APC germline mutations in Chinese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Objective:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is mainly caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. This study aimed to detect pathogenic variants in five Chinese FAP families and review all previously reported pathogenic variants of APC gene in Chinese population.

8125478
Mutation in a splice-donor site of the APC gene in a family with polyposis and late age of colonic cancer death
Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by the development of hundreds of colorectal adenomatous polyps during the first decades of life. The expression of the disease varies, as the age of onset of colonic cancer and the severity of extracolonic manifestations often differ between affected families. An attenuated form of APC has also been described in which a small number of polyps and a later age of onset of colonic cancer is observed. Cloning of the APC gene has allowed disease-causing mutations in APC families to be identified. Here, we report a novel splice site mutation (a G to T transversion at position +5 of the splice donor site in intron 9) in the APC gene of affected individuals in an Italian family. Characterization of the transcription products from this mutant APC allele revealed that normal splicing was disrupted: a shorter mRNA was expressed in which exon 8 was connected directly to exon 10. This created a shift in the reading frame and the introduction of a stop codon at position 1358. In addition, some normal APC transcript was produced from the mutant allele in lymphoblastoid cells. A comparison of the clinical features of affected members of this family with four unrelated Italian APC kindreds, in which the same AAAAG deletion at position 3926 has been found, showed a significant difference in the onset of disease symptoms and in the age of death attributable to colorectal cancer. Inefficient exon skipping may be, at least in part, responsible for the delay in the development of the disease in the reported family.

30272267
Synonymous mutation adenomatous polyposis coliΔ486s affects exon splicing and may predispose patients to adenomatous polyposis coli/mutY DNA glycosylase mutation‑negative familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant‑inherited colorectal cancer. Recent advances in genetics have indicated that the majority of patients with FAP carry germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and mutY DNA glycosylase (MUTYH) genes. However, a large subset of families with a history of FAP have undetectable pathogenic alterations, termed APC/MUTYH mutation‑negative FAP. To investigate the germline mutations in the APC and MUTYH genes in Chinese patients with FAP, 13 unrelated patients were enrolled. Through genetic sequencing, four known pathogenic alterations (Lys1061LysfsTer2, Glu1309AspfsTer4, Arg283Ter and Ser1196Ter) of APC and two novel disease‑associated pathogenic mutations (Tyr152Ter and Ter522Gly) in MUTYH were identified in six individuals. For samples that did not present with pathogenic alterations, the functional effects of missense, synonymous and intronic mutations were analyzed using bioinformatics tools and databases. Bioinformatics prediction suggested that the synonymous mutation Tyr486Tyr in APC (APC∆486s) was likely a disease‑causing polymorphism and may have induced the exon skipping of APC. A hybrid mini‑gene assay was performed, which confirmed that the synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism APC∆486s induced major splicing defects with skipping of exon 12 in APC. The data of the present study suggested that the synonymous polymorphism APC∆486s was a potential pathogenic alteration that predisposed APC/MUTYH mutation‑negative patients to FAP.

21476993
Unexplained polyposis: a challenge for geneticists, pathologists and gastroenterologists
Two main colorectal polyposis syndromes have been described, familial adenomatous polyposis and MUTYH-associated polyposis syndromes. Some polyposis remains unexplained: 20% of adenomatous polyposis and serrated polyposis. The aim of this study was to evaluate in a cohort of patients with unexplained polyposis whether a genetic defect could be detected. Individuals presenting polyposis with more than 40 adenomas or more than 20 serrated polyps (hyperplastic, sessile serrated and mixed), without causative mutation identified, were included. Complementary explorations on APC or MUTYH were performed: search for APC mosaicism, splicing-affecting mutations, large genomic rearrangement of MUTYH. Four genes of Wnt pathway (AXIN2, PPP2R1B, WIF1, SFRP1) and two genes of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) pathway (SMAD4, BMPR1A) were screened for germline mutation. Twenty-five patients had an unexplained adenomatous polyposis (familial or sporadic). Five pathogenic mutations were found: four in APC gene (with one case of mosaicism) and one in BMPR1A gene. The exploration of APC mosaicism was better performed from adenoma DNA with high-resolution melting. The screening of the candidate genes did not find any causative mutation. Thirteen individuals had an unexplained serrated polyposis and a frameshift on SMAD4 gene was identified. All mutations were identified in familial cases of polyposis. After new pathological examination, both BMPR1A and SMAD4 cases were found to be associated with a juvenile polyposis while the polyposis was initially described as adenomatous or undetermined. In 17% (6/38) of the patients the causative mutation of the polyposis was identified. Genetic causes were heterogeneous. Sporadic polyposis patients must be considered as potential APC mosaicism. The histological classification of polyposis is strongly important in direct genetic exploration.

28423518
A novel pathogenic splice acceptor site germline mutation in intron 14 of the APC gene in a Chinese family with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant precancerous condition, clinically characterized by the presence of multiple colorectal adenomas or polyps. Patients with FAP has a high risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC) from these colorectal adenomatous polyps by the mean age of diagnosis at 40 years. Germline mutations of the APC gene cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Colectomy has recommended for the FAP patients with significant polyposis. Here, we present a clinical molecular study of a four generation Chinese family with FAP. Clinical diagnosis of FAP has been done according to the phenotype, family history and medical records. Patient's blood samples were collected and genomic DNA was extracted. In order to identify the pathogenic mutation underlying the disease phenotype targeted next-generation sequencing and confirmatory sanger sequencing has undertaken. Targeted next generation sequencing identified a novel heterozygous splice-acceptor site mutation [c.1744-1G>A] in intron 14 of APC gene, which is co-segregated with the FAP phenotypes in the proband and amongst all the affected family members. This mutation is not present in unaffected family members and in normal healthy controls of same ethnic origin. According to the LOVD database for Chinese colorectal cancer patients, in Chinese population, 60% of the previously reported APC gene mutations causes FAP, are missense mutations. This novel splice-acceptor site mutation causing FAP in this Chinese family expands the germline mutation spectrum of the APC gene in the Chinese population.

17026565
Singapore familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients with classical adenomatous polyposis but undetectable APC mutations have accelerated cancer progression
Objectives:
        
      
      Germline mutation in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is detected in up to 80% of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients worldwide. In this study, we evaluated clinical features and APC mutations of Singapore FAP patients and contrasted genotype-phenotype correlation with Caucasians from other regions of the world and between FAP patients with and without detectable APC mutations.

17882487
The mutation spectrum of the APC gene in Turkish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Purpose:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis, an autosomal-dominant disease characterized by the presence of 100 or more colorectal adenomatous polyps, results from mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli tumor suppressor gene. This study was designed to investigate adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutations in members of Turkish families with familial adenomatous polyposis to constitute an adenomatous polyposis coli mutation spectrum for the Turkish population and to determine specific biomarkers for use in the early diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis.

11768390
A silent mutation in exon 14 of the APC gene is associated with exon skipping in a FAP family


27696107
Expanding the genotype-phenotype spectrum in hereditary colorectal cancer by gene panel testing
Hereditary syndromes causing colorectal cancer include both polyposis and non-polyposis syndromes. Overlapping phenotypes between the syndromes have been recognized and this make targeted molecular testing for single genes less favorable, instead there is a gaining interest for multi-gene panel-based approaches detecting both SNVs, indels and CNVs in the same assay. We applied a panel including 19 CRC susceptibility genes to 91 individuals of six phenotypic subgroups. Targeted NGS-based sequencing of the whole gene regions including introns of the 19 genes was used. The individuals had a family history of CRC or had a phenotype consistent with a known CRC syndrome. The purpose of the study was to demonstrate the diagnostic difficulties linked to genotype-phenotype diversity and the benefits of using a gene panel. Pathogenicity classification was carried out on 46 detected variants. In total we detected sixteen pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants and 30 variants of unknown clinical significance. Four of the pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were found in BMPR1A in patients with unexplained familial adenomatous polyposis or atypical adenomatous polyposis, which extends the genotype-phenotype spectrum for this gene. Nine patients had more than one variant remaining after the filtration, including three with truncating mutations in BMPR1A, PMS2 and AXIN2. CNVs were found in three patients, in upstream regions of SMAD4, MSH3 and CTNNB1, and one additional individual harbored a 24.2 kb duplication in CDH1 intron1.

19111562
A missense mutation in the APC tumor suppressor gene disrupts an ASF/SF2 splicing enhancer motif and causes pathogenic skipping of exon 14
A missense mutation at codon 640 in the APC gene was identified in a familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patient, however, its pathological consequence remained unclear. Here we found that this missense mutation interferes at the nucleotide level with an exonic splicing regulatory element and leads to aberrant splicing of the mutant APC transcript rather than exerting its effect through the observed amino acid change. Analysis of the patient RNA revealed complete skipping of exon 14 in transcripts from the mutant APC allele, leading to a frameshift and a premature stop codon. When cloned into a splicing reporter minigene and transfected into colorectal cell lines, the exon 14 point mutation c.1918C>G (pR640G) was found sufficient to cause the observed exon skipping. Bioinformatic analysis predicted the mutation to change SRp55, hnRNP A1 or ASF/SF2 splicing factor binding sites. Using RNA interference methodology these predictions were experimentally validated and revealed that only ASF/SF2 was required for exon 14 inclusion. These research data identify APC mutation c.1918C>G (pR640G) as pathogenic and indicate a mechanism involving disruption of an ASF/SF2 exonic splicing enhancer element. The results allow genetic diagnosis of a hereditary tumour predisposition but also illustrate the need to complement in silico prediction by splicing reporter assays.

23348723
Prediction of mutant mRNA splice isoforms by information theory-based exon definition
Mutations that affect mRNA splicing often produce multiple mRNA isoforms, resulting in complex molecular phenotypes. Definition of an exon and its inclusion in mature mRNA relies on joint recognition of both acceptor and donor splice sites. This study predicts cryptic and exon-skipping isoforms in mRNA produced by splicing mutations from the combined information contents (R(i), which measures binding-site strength, in bits) and distribution of the splice sites defining these exons. The total information content of an exon (R(i),total) is the sum of the R(i) values of its acceptor and donor splice sites, adjusted for the self-information of the distance separating these sites, that is, the gap surprisal. Differences between total information contents of an exon (ΔR(i,total)) are predictive of the relative abundance of these exons in distinct processed mRNAs. Constraints on splice site and exon selection are used to eliminate nonconforming and poorly expressed isoforms. Molecular phenotypes are computed by the Automated Splice Site and Exon Definition Analysis (http://splice.uwo.ca) server. Predictions of splicing mutations were highly concordant (85.2%; n = 61) with published expression data. In silico exon definition analysis will contribute to streamlining assessment of abnormal and normal splice isoforms resulting from mutations.

24823678
A case of a child with an APC pathogenic mutation, aberrant expression of splice variants and positive family history of FAP
Familial adenomatous polyposis is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease characterized by the appearance of hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomatous polyps; if left untreated, there is nearly a 100% lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. In the present case, adenomatous polyps were observed at 6 years of age. Unlike our previous assumption, adenomatous polyps were detected by colonoscopy at <10 years of age. Considering the clinical importance of early diagnosis, we report this case involving germline adenomatous polyposis coli mutation (c.1958G > C, GenBank: M74088.1) that caused an increase in the isoform without exon 15. Although this isoform has been reported previously, it remains controversial whether the variant is pathogenic or not because it was observed both in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and in normal controls. Nonetheless, due to quantitative distortion of splice variants in adenomatous polyposis coli transcripts and the early development of adenomatous polyps, we believe that this variant may be pathogenic.

19036155
Broad phenotypic spectrum in familial adenomatous polyposis; from early onset and severe phenotypes to late onset of attenuated polyposis with the first manifestation at age 72
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is typically characterized by multiple colonic polyps and frequent extracolonic features. Whereas the number of colonic polyps has been linked to the APC gene mutation, possible genotype-phenotype correlations largely remain to be defined for the extracolonic manifestations.

27087319
Point Mutations in Exon 1B of APC Reveal Gastric Adenocarcinoma and Proximal Polyposis of the Stomach as a Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Variant
Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS) is an autosomal-dominant cancer-predisposition syndrome with a significant risk of gastric, but not colorectal, adenocarcinoma. We mapped the gene to 5q22 and found loss of the wild-type allele on 5q in fundic gland polyps from affected individuals. Whole-exome and -genome sequencing failed to find causal mutations but, through Sanger sequencing, we identified point mutations in APC promoter 1B that co-segregated with disease in all six families. The mutations reduced binding of the YY1 transcription factor and impaired activity of the APC promoter 1B in luciferase assays. Analysis of blood and saliva from carriers showed allelic imbalance of APC, suggesting that these mutations lead to decreased allele-specific expression in vivo. Similar mutations in APC promoter 1B occur in rare families with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Promoter 1A is methylated in GAPPS and sporadic FGPs and in normal stomach, which suggests that 1B transcripts are more important than 1A in gastric mucosa. This might explain why all known GAPPS-affected families carry promoter 1B point mutations but only rare FAP-affected families carry similar mutations, the colonic cells usually being protected by the expression of the 1A isoform. Gastric polyposis and cancer have been previously described in some FAP-affected individuals with large deletions around promoter 1B. Our finding that GAPPS is caused by point mutations in the same promoter suggests that families with mutations affecting the promoter 1B are at risk of gastric adenocarcinoma, regardless of whether or not colorectal polyps are present.

27343414
The first European family with gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach: case report and review of the literature
Background and aims:
        
      
      Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS) has to date been recognized in only 8 families worldwide. Recently, different point mutations within the Ying Yang 1 (YY1) binding motif in promoter 1B of the APC gene were assigned as causal in 6 families with GAPPS.

29968043
First report of an Asian family with gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS) revealed with the germline mutation of the APC exon 1B promoter region
A 48-year-old Japanese female with left hypochondralgia presented at our hospital. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed gastric cancers and carpeting fundic gland polyposis (FGPs) without Helicobacter pylori infection. Computed tomography showed multiple liver metastases. Total colonoscopy revealed a colonic tubular adenoma but not polyposis. She was diagnosed as having advanced gastric cancer with liver metastasis and received chemotherapy. Her mother had died from gastric cancer, and her elderly brother and niece had FGPs as revealed by EGD. Thus, the pedigree was diagnosed as gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS). Germline mutation analysis exhibited a point mutation in exon1B of the APC gene (c.-191T > C). Adenocarcinoma showed a gastric mucinous phenotype and was positive for a somatic mutation of p53, suggesting that p53 mutation may play a role in FGPs carcinogenesis. This is the first family with GAPPS in Asia in whom germline mutation of APC exon 1B has been detected.

32702694
Role of a Rare Variant in APC Gene Promoter 1B Region in Classic Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is most commonly caused by germline variants in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Although definite pathogenic variants could be detected in the majority of individuals with FAP, there are still numerous variant-negative FAP patients.

28105931
Regulatory single nucleotide polymorphisms (rSNPs) at the promoters 1A and 1B of the human APC gene
Background:
        
      
      Germline mutations in the coding sequence of the tumour suppressor APC gene give rise to familial adenomatous polyposis (which leads to colorectal cancer) and are associated with many other oncopathologies. The loss of APC function because of deletion of putative promoter 1A or 1B also results in the development of colorectal cancer. Since the regions of promoters 1A and 1B contain many single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the aim of this study was to perform functional analysis of some of these SNPs by means of an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and a luciferase reporter assay.

8252630
Alleles of the APC gene: an attenuated form of familial polyposis
An attenuated form of familial adenomatous polyposis coli, AAPC, causes relatively few colonic polyps, but still carries a significant risk of colon cancer. The mutant alleles responsible for this attenuated phenotype have been mapped in several families to the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) locus on human chromosome 5q. Four distinct mutations in the APC gene have now been identified in seven AAPC families. These mutations that predict truncation products, either by single base pair changes or frameshifts, are similar to mutations identified in families with classical APC. However, they differ in that the four mutated sites are located very close to one another and nearer the 5' end of the APC gene than any base substitutions or small deletions yet discovered in patients with classical APC.

21646762
[A family with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis identified because of fundic gland polyposis]
We report a 41-year-old woman who had fundic gland polyposis without a colorectal polyp. Because her father had colon cancer, multiple colorectal polyps and the gastric polyposis, we suspected AFAP and researched the APC gene. There was 1 base pair deletion of guanine at codon 99-100 in exon 3 of the APC gene, and its frame shift mutation made stop codon at codon 124. It was proved that the gene carrier of AFAP can be discovered based on the family-history and the presence of fundic gland polyposis, even when no colorectal polyps exist.

27783336
Attenuated polyposis of the large bowel: a morphologic and molecular approach
Attenuated polyposis could be defined as a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in which synchronous polyps of the large bowel range between 10 and 99. We analysed all cases of attenuated polyposis observed over the last 30 years with the objectives: (A) to classify the disease according to different type and proportion of polyps; (B) To ascertain the contribution of APC and MutYH genes; (C) to discover features which could arise the suspicion of mutations; (D) To obtain indications for management and follow-up. 84 individuals in 82 families were studied. Polyps were classified into four groups as adenoma, hyperplastic, other serrated lesions or others; APC and MutYH mutations were assessed. Mean age at diagnosis was 54 ± 14 years in men and 48 ± 13 in women (P = 0.005). Polyps were more numerous in women (37 ± 26 vs 29 ± 22). Sixty % of patients underwent bowel resection, mainly for cancer; the remaining were managed through endoscopy. A total of 2586 polyps were detected at diagnostic endoscopy: 2026 (80 %) were removed and analysed. Adenomas were diagnosed in 1445 (70 %), hyperplastic polyps in 541 (26 %), other serrated lesions in 61 (2.9 %). Adenomas and hyperplastic lesions were detected in the majority of patients. In 68 patients (81 %) in whom studies were executed, APC mutations were found in 8 and MutYH mutations in 10. Genetic variants were more frequent in women (12 vs 6, P = 0.039). Taking into consideration the prevalent (>50 %) histology and presence of mutations, patients could be subdivided into four groups: (1) APC mutated polyposis (AFAP), when adenomas were >50 % and APC mutations detected (no. 8, 10 %); (2) MutYH mutated polyposis (MAP), adenomas >50 % and biallelic MutYH mutations (no. 10, 12 %); (1) attenuated polyposis without detectable mutations, prevalence of adenomas, 48 cases (57 %); (1) hyperplastic-serrated polyposis, with prevalence (>50 %) of hyperplastic/other serrated lesions and no constitutional mutation (no. 18, 21 %). Aggregation of tumors, cancer in probands, distribution of polyps and other clinical characteristics showed no difference among the four groups. In conclusions, AFAP and MAP, the polyposis labeled by constitutional mutations, represented about 25 % of all attenuated polyposis. Mutation-associated cases showed an earlier age of onset of polyps and were more frequent in the female sex.

14574009
Profuse familial adenomatous polyposis with an adenomatous polyposis coli exon 3 mutation
The attenuated form of familial adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC) is associated with mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene which cluster in the 5' region of the gene. It has been proposed that a 'genotype-phenotype boundary' exists at codons 159-163, and mutations that are 5' of this boundary will produce AAPC. Herein we document a three-generation family with an exon 3 mutation well to the 5' side of the proposed boundary, in which two affected individuals have had, in their 40s, a profuse form of familial adenomatous polyposis coli. We conclude that the codon 159-163 'boundary' is indicative rather than definitive. These two patients also had postoperative intra-abdominal adhesions, severely so in one.

15952110
Analysis of germline mutations in the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis patients
Objective:
        
      
      This study was aimed at establishing an efficient mutation analysis technique system to screen the germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene that predisposes the disease susceptibility in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and to investigate the relationship between genotype and phenotype of APC gene.

10634400
Germline mutations of the APC gene in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid carcinoma: results from a European cooperative study
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is one extracolonic manifestation affecting about 1-2% of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Ninety-seven patients with FAP-associated PTC have previously been reported, including 6 pairs of siblings. During a European collaborative study, 15 patients with FAP-associated PTC were collected. All 15 patients were females. The mean age at thyroidectomy was 24.9 yr (range, 19-39 yr). In 13 subjects, APC germline mutations had been detected; they were at codons 140, 593, 778, 976, 993, 1061 (n = 5), 1105 (n = 1), and 1309 (n = 2), respectively. A review of the literature added 11 other patients with FAP-associated PTC and detection of germline APC mutations; they were at codons 313 (n = 2), 698 (n = 3), 848 (n = 2), 1209 (n = 2), 1061 (n = 1), and 1105 (n = 1), respectively. The latter led to formation of the same stop codon (TAA) at 1125-1126 as the mutation at codon 1061. Therefore, 21 of 24 mutations were in exon 15 in the genomic area usually associated with congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE), i.e. codons 463-1387. Typical CHRPE was found in 17 of 18 affected patients who had specific screening. Interestingly, 22 of the 24 patients had their mutation out of the mutation cluster region (codons 1286-1513), which is currently considered the hot spot mutation area, in particular for extracolonic manifestations of FAP. The difference in the incidence of germline mutations before and after codon 1220 between PTC and non-PTC FAP patients was statistically significant (P<0.05) for both patients and kindreds (P = 0.005 and P = 0.049, respectively). Even if most mutations were scattered throughout the entire 5'-portion of exon 15, 8 of 23 patients (6 with mutation at 1061 and 2 with mutation at 1105; i.e. more than one third) had the same truncated protein product. The awareness that patients with PTC usually have APC mutations that cluster in a well defined genomic area, in addition to giving a deeper insight into gene function, could facilitate both earlier diagnosis and better treatment. In particular, intensive screening for thyroid nodules after age 15 yr is recommended when a single patient or an entire kindred have CHRPE and/or mutations in the 5'-portion of exon 15.

25676610
A novel APC mutation defines a second locus for Cenani-Lenz syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Cenani-Lenz syndrome (CLS) is an autosomal recessive condition characterised by a unique pattern of syndactyly, and variable penetrance of renal agenesis and facial dysmorphism. LRP4 mutations were identified in most, but not all patients with this syndrome, suggesting the presence of at least one additional locus.

29620724
Expanding the phenome and variome of skeletal dysplasia
Purpose:
        
      
      To describe our experience with a large cohort (411 patients from 288 families) of various forms of skeletal dysplasia who were molecularly characterized.

22447671
An AT-rich region in the APC gene may cause misinterpretation of familial adenomatous polyposis molecular screening
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal-dominant condition mainly due to a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The present study reports evidence of a technical issue occurring during the mutational analysis of APC exon 4. Genetic conventional direct sequence analysis of a repetitive AT-rich region in the splice acceptor site of APC intron 3 could be misinterpreted as a pathogenetic frameshift result. However, this potential bias may be bypassed adopting a method for random mutagenesis of DNA based on the use of a triphosphate nucleoside analogues mixture. Using this method as a second-level analysis, we also demonstrated the nonpathogenic nature of the variant in the poly A trait in APC exon 4 region (c.423-4delA) that do not result in aberrant splicing of APC exons 3-4; conversely, we did not find a previously reported T deletion/insertion polymorphism.

14734220
Challenging colonic polyposis pedigrees: differential diagnosis, surveillance, and management concerns
Hereditary polyposis syndromes show extensive phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity within and among families, a situation that may hinder diagnosis. In these settings, germline mutation testing may be the sine qua non for diagnosis if such a mutation is identified in a patient or family. We provide examples of phenotypically differing polyposis pedigrees depicting various challenges in hereditary polyposis syndrome diagnosis. Our purpose is to augment physician understanding of phenotypic variation and thus help identify high-risk presymptomatic family members who could benefit from highly targeted surveillance and management strategies. We describe nine familial polyposis pedigrees displaying anecdotal clinical problems that can confound the differential diagnosis. Emphasis was given to a multidisciplinary approach focusing on pathological confirmation with respect to number, histology, and location of polyps in the gastrointestinal tract; a detailed family history of cancer at all anatomic sites; noncancer phenotypic features of hereditary polyposis syndromes; and appropriate molecular genetic testing in concert with genetic counseling. Improved physician understanding of the clinical natural history features, genetic transmission patterns, and appropriate gene testing will help in diagnosis and, ultimately, surveillance and management for the various hereditary polyposis syndromes.

23715166
Multifocal hepatic neoplasia in 3 children with APC gene mutation
Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common hepatic neoplasm in children is associated with germline mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli tumor-suppressor gene that cause familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. Individuals with familial adenomatous polyposis have a 750 to 7500× the risk of developing HB. We report 3 children with APC gene mutation, who underwent resection or liver transplant for HB. In addition to HB, all 3 patients had multiple independent adenoma-like nodules lacking qualities of intrahepatic metastases. Twenty-five nodules were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis using a panel of antibodies including glypican-3 (GPC3), β-catenin, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CD34, Ki-67, glutamine synthetase (GS), and fatty acid binding protein. The nodules were round, ranged in size from 0.2 to 1.5 cm, and paler than the background liver. All lacked the chemotherapy effect. The nodules were circumscribed but nonencapsulated and composed of well-differentiated hepatocytes with occasional minor atypical features and absent or rare portal tracts. One lesion displayed a "nodule-within-nodule" pattern. The nodules demonstrated diffuse GS overexpression. Nine (36%) nodules were focally reactive for GPC3, and 1 (4%) displayed focal nuclear β-catenin expression. The associated HB showed diffuse expression of GS, GPC3, and β-catenin nuclear staining. We interpret these nodules as neoplastic with most being adenomas (GPC3 negative) that show features of independent origin and represent early stages of carcinogenesis, implying potential to progress to HB or hepatocellular carcinoma. To our knowledge, this is the first report of multifocal neoplasms in patients with HB and APC gene mutation.

16710723
The AAPC case, with an early onset of colorectal cancer
Introduction:
        
      
      Attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC) is a variant of the familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) characterized by the occurrence of sparse polyps in the colon, stomach, and duodenum with a late onset of colorectal cancer. The AAPC syndrome is associated with mutations at the 5' region of the APC gene. Until recently, the fragment encompassing codons 157 and 170 was considered as boundary for the described cases of AAPC and FAP syndromes.

10768871
The relationship between frequencies of extracolonic manifestations and the position of APC germline mutation in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients develop various extracolonic lesions; however, the relationship between germline mutation of the APC gene and extracolonic manifestations is mostly unknown. To examine the genotype-phenotype relationship, we compared the APC mutation and clinical data.

20977806
[Desmoid tumour as indication of familial adenomatous polyposis]
In two patients, a man aged 43 and a woman aged 40 years, who presented with a desmoid tumour, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) was diagnosed three and six years later, respectively. The second patient had developed metastatic rectal cancer. Desmoid-type fibromatoses usually develop sporadically, but may also be an extracolonic manifestation of FAP. All patients with desmoids diagnosed who are under age 60, or with desmoids located intra-abdominally or in the abdominal wall, should be referred for colonic and genetic evaluation. In all further patients with a desmoid tumour, the possibility of FAP should be considered and patient data and the family history should be evaluated thoroughly. If FAP is suspected, patients should be referred for colonoscopic examination and genetic evaluation.

28644590
MUTYH-Associated Polyposis: The Irish Experience>
MUTYH is involved in DNA damage repair. Bi-allelic MUTYH mutations predispose to polyposis and gastrointestinal malignancies, distinct genetically from autosomal dominant familial adenomatous polyposis coli. Two common European MUTYH mutations account for 90% of MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP). We aimed to examine the incidence of MAP in Ireland. A retrospective cohort study was undertaken. Patients undergoing MUTYH testing from 2003-2016 were identified by searching electronic databases using terms "MUTYH" and "MYH". Phenotypic and genotypic details were obtained by chart review. Bi-allelic mutations were confirmed in 26 individuals (17 families), of whom 16 (62%) developed colorectal malignancies, and 22(85%) polyposis. Eleven families had bi-allelic status for one/both common European mutations. Regional variation was noted, with over-representation of bi-allelic mutation carriers in the South-west of Ireland. MAP is under-diagnosed in Ireland. Increased awareness is required to facilitate appropriate identification and surveillance of bi-allelic mutation carriers for colorectal pathology.

14729851
Novel germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in Polish families with familial adenomatous polyposis


9452119
Two novel mutations in exons 5 and 15 of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene


21488256
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: APC. Disease: adenomatous polyposis coli


9603437
A family with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis due to a mutation in the alternatively spliced region of APC exon 9
A family is presented with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis of variable phenotype. The clinical features range from sparse right-sided polyposis and cancer in the proximal colon at the age of 34 to pan-colonic polyposis and cancer at the age of 68. Rectal sparing is common to all affected members. Heteroduplex analysis detected bands of altered mobility in exon 9 of the APC gene in all affected family members. Subsequently, a frameshift mutation was found in the alternatively spliced region of exon 9 at codon 398 which resulted in a stop signal 4 codons downstream. Alternatively spliced transcripts that delete the mutation were readily amplified from normal colonic mucosa and therefore create a mechanism for the attenuated phenotype seen in this family.

8019566
A novel mutation at the splice junction of exon 9 of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis


33740971
A distinct APC pathogenic germline variant identified in a southern Thai family with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by pathogenic germline variants in the APC gene. To date, multiple pathogenic variants in coding regions, splice sites, and deep intronic regions have been revealed. However, there are still pathogenic variants that remain unidentified.

8733048
A novel deletion at codon 441 of the APC gene associated with ophthalmic lesions (CHRPE) in a South African family
A novel mutation at codon 441 in exon 10 of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene was identified in a South African family of mixed ancestry, using a convenient, non-radioactive, heteroduplex-SSCP screening assay. This single thymidine deletion after nucleotide position 1322 creates a frameshift resulting in a downstream stop codon at amino acid residue 453 of the APC gene. Genotypes of nine family members were subsequently correlated with the presence or absence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE), since expression of this common extracolonic manifestation of FAP is largely determined by the length of the truncated protein. CHRPE was absent in the five unaffected family members analysed, while four mutation positive subjects showed these ophthalmic lesions. Correlation between the molecular analysis and ophthalmic examinations, performed without knowledge of clinical and genetic status respectively, provided additional evidence in favour of the view that the range of phenotypic expression in FAP may result from different allelic manifestations of APC mutations.

29901124
A novel APC mutation identified in a large Chinese family with familial adenomatous polyposis and a brief literature review
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant disease, is a colon cancer predisposition syndrome that manifests as a large number of adenomatous polyps. Mutations in the Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for the majority of cases of FAP. The purpose of the present study was to report the clinical features of a Chinese family with FAP and screen for novel mutations using the targeted next‑generation sequencing technology. Among the 29 family members, 12 were diagnosed of FAP. Based on an established filtering strategy and data analyses, along with confirmation by Sanger sequencing and co‑segregation, a novel frameshift mutation c.1317delA (p.Ala440LeufsTer14) in exon 10 of the APC gene was identified. To the best of our knowledge, this mutation has not been reported prior to the present study. In addition, it was correlated with extra‑colonic phenotypes featuring duodenal polyposis and sebaceous cysts in this family. This novel frameshift mutation causing FAP not only expands the germline mutation spectrum of the APC gene in the Chinese population, but it also increases the understanding of the phenotypic and genotypic correlations of FAP, and may potentially lead to improved genetic counseling and specific treatment for families with FAP in the future.

26837502
Rapid detection of germline mutations for hereditary gastrointestinal polyposis/cancers using HaloPlex target enrichment and high-throughput sequencing technologies
Genetic testing for hereditary colorectal polyposis/cancers has become increasingly important. Therefore, the development of a timesaving diagnostic platform is indispensable for clinical practice. We designed and validated target enrichment sequencing for 20 genes implicated in familial gastrointestinal polyposis/cancers in 32 cases with previously confirmed mutations using the HaloPlex enrichment system and MiSeq. We demonstrated that HaloPlex captured the targeted regions with a high efficiency (99.66 % for covered target regions, and 99.998 % for breadth of coverage), and MiSeq achieved a high sequencing accuracy (98.6 % for the concordant rate with SNP arrays). Using this approach, we correctly identified 33/33 (100 %) confirmed alterations including SNV, small INDELs and large deletions, and insertions in APC, BMPR1A, EPCAM, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, and SKT11. Our approach yielded the sequences of 20 target genes in a single experiment, and correctly identified all previously known mutations. Our results indicate that our approach successfully detected a wide range of genetic variations in a short turnaround time and with a small sample size for the rapid screening of known causative gene mutations of inherited colon cancer, such as familial adenomatous polyposis, Lynch syndrome, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and Juvenile polyposis syndrome.

8162022
Frequency of common and novel inactivating APC mutations in 202 families with familial adenomatous polyposis
In the course of presymptomatic diagnosis in families with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) we screened 202 unrelated patients for mutations in the APC gene. Germ-line mutations were identified in 20.8% of the index patients by a single step screening procedure based on heteroduplex analysis of a PCR product encompassing codons 1027-1384 of the APC gene. The most common mutations in our sample were a 5 bp deletion at codon 1309 in 9% of the families, a 5 bp deletion at codon 1061 in 5% and a 4 bp deletion at codon 1068 in 2.5% of the families. In addition, 11 novel mutations localized within the exons 11-15 of the APC gene were identified by the heteroduplex or SSCP methods.

30588011
c.1439delA frameshift deletion mutation in familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease related to germline mutations of the APC gene. The clinical features of this disease most commonly include hundreds of adenomas or polyps. If not treated in a timely fashion, FAP can eventually result in colorectal carcinoma. In this report, clinical manifestations, family history, relevant auxiliary examinations and gene detection from patient blood led us to discover a novel frameshift mutation in exon 12 of the APC gene. The deletion of adenine in c.1439 resulted in the formation of codon 480. The occurrence of this frameshift deletion may lead to inexpressibility of the main functional regions in APC and may affect gene function. In addition, colonoscopy and histopathology showed malignant changes in the colon and rectum. There have been no reports of this frameshift mutation, but it can be considered in case of APC mutations and FAP in patients with clinical manifestations; auxiliary examination may be related, and it may be used as a reference for preventive clinical treatment in the future.

12173026
Pathogenic mutations and rare variants of the APC gene identified in 75 Belgian patients with familial adenomatous polyposis by fluorescent enzymatic mutation detection (EMD)
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominant inherited colorectal cancer syndrome which is caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Enzymatic mutation detection (EMD) has potential advantages over the standard protein truncation test (PTT) that is currently used in screening the APC gene for mutations. First we wanted to validate the EMD technique in comparison to PTT. Secondly, we wanted to develop an efficient working protocol for EMD screening of APC. Seventy-five unrelated patients were screened for mutations. All mutations that had previously been detected by PTT were also identified by EMD; the sizes of the cleavage fragments were as expected according to the position of the mutations within the amplicons. A new screening strategy based on EMD allows the analysis of the APC gene in 31 overlapping PCR fragments. In total, EMD efficiently detected the 26 truncating mutations in this series. In addition, two rare variants were also detected: the first is the typical Ashkenazi missense mutation I1307K while the second variant, E1317Q, has been identifed in Belgian patients and controls, and should no longer be considered as a pathogenic mutation, but rather classified as a polymorphism.

20589194
A novel frameshift mutation in exon 12 of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in an Italian family with familial adenomatous polyposis and desmoid tumour


11145293
Novel germline APC mutations in Swedish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and Gardner syndrome
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a familial cancer syndrome in which affected individuals develop multiple adenomatous polyps and are thereby at greatly increased risk of developing colorectal cancer. Gardner syndrome is a variant of FAP, in which the patients also develop extraintestinal tumors, in particular osteomas and desmoid tumors. An attenuated form of the disease (AFAP) is associated with fewer polyps, but still a high risk for colorectal cancer. Germline mutations in the adenomatosis polyposis coli (APC) gene cause FAP and Gardner syndrome and have recently been associated also with the development of AFAP.

33670833
APC Splicing Mutations Leading to In-Frame Exon 12 or Exon 13 Skipping Are Rare Events in FAP Pathogenesis and Define the Clinical Outcome
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene APC. To date, nearly 2000 APC mutations have been described in FAP, most of which are predicted to result in truncated protein products. Mutations leading to aberrant APC splicing have rarely been reported. Here, we characterized a novel germline heterozygous splice donor site mutation in APC exon 12 (NM_000038.5: c.1621_1626+7del) leading to exon 12 skipping in an Italian family with the attenuated FAP (AFAP) phenotype. Moreover, we performed a literature meta-analysis of APC splicing mutations. We found that 119 unique APC splicing mutations, including the one described here, have been reported in FAP patients, 69 of which have been characterized at the mRNA level. Among these, only a small proportion (9/69) results in an in-frame protein, with four mutations causing skipping of exon 12 or 13 with loss of armadillo repeat 2 (ARM2) and 3 (ARM3), and five mutations leading to skipping of exon 5, 7, 8, or (partially) 9 with loss of regions not encompassing known functional domains. The APC splicing mutations causing skipping of exon 12 or 13 considered in this study cluster with the AFAP phenotype and reveal a potential molecular mechanism of pathogenesis in FAP disease.

11896079
A case of myoepithelial carcinoma displaying biallelic inactivation of the tumour suppressor gene APC in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutation of the APC gene. It is characterised by the appearance of hundreds to thousands of colorectal adenomas in adolescence and the subsequent development of colorectal cancer. Various extracolonic malignancies are associated with FAP, including desmoids and neoplasms of the stomach, duodenum, pancreas, liver, and brain. We present a family affected by FAP with an exon 14 APC mutation displaying two rare extracolonic lesions, a hepatoblastoma and a myoepithelial carcinoma. The hepatoblastoma was found in a male patient aged 2 years. The second lesion, a myoepithelial carcinoma of the right cheek, was found in a female patient aged 14 years. Inactivation of the normal APC allele was demonstrated in this lesion by loss of heterozygosity analysis, thus implicating APC in the initiation or progression of this neoplasm. This is the first reported case of this lesion in a family affected by FAP.

33654310
Germline FFPE inherited cancer panel testing in deceased family members: implications for clinical management of unaffected relatives
Where previously, germline genetic testing in deceased affected relatives was not possible due to the absence of lymphocytic DNA, the North-West-Genomic-Laboratory Hub (NWGLH) has developed and validated next-generation sequencing based gene panels utilising formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue DNA from deceased individuals. This technology has been utilised in the clinical setting for the management of unaffected relatives seen in the Clinical Genetics Service (CGS). Here we assess the clinical impact. At the time of data collection, the NWGLH had analysed 180 FFPE tissue samples from deceased affected individuals: 134 from breast and/or ovarian cancer cases for germline variants in the BRCA1/BRCA2 genes and 46 from colorectal, gastric, ovarian and endometrial cancer cases for germline variants in a panel of 13 genes implicated in inherited colorectal cancer and gastric cancer conditions. Successful analysis was achieved in 140/180 cases (78%). In total, 29 germline pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified in autosomal dominant cancer predisposition genes where the gene was pertinent to the cancer family history (including BRCA1/BRCA2, the mismatch-repair genes and APC). Of the 180 cases, the impact of the result on clinical management of unaffected relatives was known in 143 cases. Of these, the results in 54 cases (38%) directly impacted the clinical management of relatives seen by the CGS. This included changes to risk assessments, screening recommendations and the availability of predictive genetic testing to unaffected relatives. Our data demonstrate how FFPE testing in deceased relatives is an accurate and informative tool in the clinical management of patients referred to the CGS.

9067764
Three novel germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene


31469036
Multifocality in a Patient with Cribriform-Morular Variant of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Is an Important Clue for the Diagnosis of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Background: Cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (CMV-PTC) is a rare subtype of PTC, which occurrs predominantly in young women. This disease much more frequently presents in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is an autosomal dominant inherited disease, which arises from germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. To clarify the distinctive clinical features of CMV-PTC, a comparison study was performed between familial types and sporadic types. Methods: Between 2007 and 2018, 15 CMV-PTC patients underwent thyroidectomy in Samsung Medical Center. The clinical features of these patients were retrospectively reviewed. Results: All patients were women with a median age of 26 years (range 17-46 years). The median maximum diameter was 1.0 cm (range 0.4-3.5 cm). All tumors underwent immunostaining and showed nuclear and/or cytoplasmic staining for β-catenin. On ultrasonography, most nodules had benign-looking features (well-defined, hypoechoic, and oval to round shapes without calcification), but a few nodules had capsular invasion and taller than wide shape. On preoperative fine-needle aspiration cytology, five patients (33%) were diagnosed as CMV-PTC, nine (60%) as PTC, but one (7%) as follicular neoplasm or PTC-follicular variant. Six patients (40%) had FAP, and four of them had total colectomy due to FAP. Five of them had a family history of FAP or colon cancer, or thyroid cancer. Germline mutations in the APC gene were found in all six patients with CMV-PTC associated with FAP, and five of them had de novo mutations. All patients with FAP-associated CMV-PTC had multiple tumors. All CMV-PTC patients had excellent response to initial therapy. Conclusions: Because of the association between FAP or colon cancer with multifocal CMV-PTC, we confirm that mutational analysis of the APC gene and colonoscopy should be carried out in these patients when multiple thyroid tumors are found.

8381581
Identification of APC gene mutations in Italian adenomatous polyposis coli patients by PCR-SSCP analysis
The APC gene is a putative human tumor-suppressor gene responsible for adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), an inherited, autosomal dominant predisposition to colon cancer. It is also implicated in the development of sporadic colorectal tumors. The characterization of APC gene mutations in APC patients is clinically important because DNA-based tests can be applied for presymptomatic diagnosis once a specific mutation has been identified in a family. Moreover, the identification of the spectrum of APC gene mutations in patients is of great interest in the study of the biological properties of the APC gene product. We analyzed the entire coding region of the APC gene by the PCR-single-strand conformation polymorphism method in 42 unrelated Italian APC patients. Mutations were found in 12 cases. These consist of small (5-14 bp) base-pair deletions leading to frameshifts; all are localized within exon 15. Two of these deletions, a 5-bp deletion at position 3183-3187 and a 5-bp deletion at position 3926-3930, are present in 3/42 and 7/42 cases of our series, respectively, indicating the presence of mutational hot spots at these two sites.

21598003
A novel pathogenic germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in a Tunisian family with FAP
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder which typically presents with colorectal cancer in early adult life, secondary to extensive adenomatous polyps of the colon. In addition to the colonic manifestations, the syndrome presents several extracolonic features including, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment, osteomata and desmoid tumors. In this study, we aimed to investigate the clinical and genetic features in a Tunisian family with FAP. Sequence of the APC gene (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) revealed a novel mutation (c.2016-2017 del TA) in exon 15, present in all affected individuals in an heterozygous state. The frameshift mutation generates a premature stop codon at amino acid 677 of the APC protein (p. H672Qfs X5). The unaffected family members did not harbor this mutation, however, a first degree relative of the patient aged of 32-year-old was phenotypically normal but carries the c.2016-2017 del TA mutation. This discrepancy can be explained by the effect of modifier gene which can affect the expressivity of the disease.

24309598
A novel APC gene mutation associated with a severe phenotype in a patient with Turcot syndrome
Turcot syndrome is a rare inherited condition of colonic polyposis associated with central nervous system tumors. We report a patient with a novel adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutation leading to a severe phenotype including medulloblastoma, low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma following cranial radiation, pilomatrixomas, colonic adenomas, and abdominal desmoid tumor following colectomy, all of which were successfully treated. Multiple tumors may be seen in patients with Turcot syndrome but the occurrence of sarcomas is rare. This case highlights the importance of close follow-up for patients with Turcot syndrome and the importance of a broad differential diagnosis in evaluating a condition in which multiple tumors are frequently seen.

21567933
A remarkable APC mosaicism with two mutant alleles in a family with familial adenomatous polyposis


23873622
A new germline stop codon mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene predisposing to familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder related to germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. It is characterized by the detection of numerous adenomatous polyps that, if untreated, develop into colorectal cancer. We studied an Italian family with FAP history and the related colorectal tumor sample of the proband. Sequencing analysis of blood samples revealed the presence of a never-reported germline mutation in the APC gene (exon 15): an heterozygous G deletion at position c.2126 resulting in a premature stop codon (p.Gly721GlufsX6) and in a truncated protein. This mutation was also identified in the colorectal tumor tissue, together with a second known pathogenic heterozygotic somatic mutation, c.4348C&gt;T (p.Arg1450X), which generates a premature truncated protein. The novel identified germline mutation is therefore related to FAP and, in accordance with Knudson's "two hit" hypothesis, can be considered the first event predisposing to the insurgence of colorectal cancer in these patients. The somatic hit inactivating the second allele of the APC gene is located in the mutation cluster region of the gene; this is not a random event since it depends on the position of the germline mutation. The inactivation of APC generates the neoplastic growth advantage to the cell.

24999926
Polyposis syndromes in children and adolescents: a case series data analysis
Background:
        
      
      Polyposis syndromes in children are distinct entities clinically and pathologically. These syndromes have multiple genetic characteristics, with development of polyps at various sites of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and are associated with an increased risk of colon cancer. They are relatively rare, and have mostly been characterized in the adult population, whereas little epidemiologic data have been reported in children.

12357334
De novo mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) results from a germline mutation in the APC gene. A new mutation rate of 4-9 x 10(-6) mutations/gametes/generation has been reported. In other familial cancer syndromes a bias for paternal origin of new mutations has been described. This bias is probably due to a larger number of cell divisions during spermatogenesis compared to oogenesis; giving a larger susceptibility for mutagenesis. We report here a molecular genetic analysis of 26 FAP patients with putative de novo APC mutations. In 15 families the novel origin of the mutations was confirmed by haplotyping and sequencing. Analysis of 10 of these mutations, in which the parental origin could be established, gave a 6 : 4 distribution in favour of maternal origin. This is in agreement with a 1 : 1 distribution and does not indicate an expected paternal bias. Moreover, no parental age effect was identified. We propose that APC germline mutations are not premeiotic events but more likely arise during the meiosis. This would give an equal susceptibility for mutagenesis during spermatogenesis and oogenesis, respectively. The model is in concordance with the previously established difference between APC somatic mutations, as being a mitotic event and APC germline mutations, as being a meiotic event. The confirmation of 15 de novo mutations by a molecular genetic approach is in fine agreement with previous results based on clinical records.

10440612
Germline and somatic mutations in exon 15 of the APC gene and K-ras mutations in duodenal adenomas in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      In sporadic colorectal adenomas mutations in the adenomatous polyposis gene (APC) are among the first gene aberrations to appear. In familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) the patients already have a germline mutation in the APC gene. To investigate the natural history of duodenal adenomas in FAP patients, we examined germline and somatic mutations of the APC gene and K-ras mutations in these lesions.

28551651
Complete Reversion of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Phenotype Associated with Tacrolimus and Mycophenolate Mofetil Treatment Following Kidney Transplantation
Numerous germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor-suppressor gene are responsible for development of multiple adenomatous colorectal polyps with their inevitable progression to cancer. Multiple attempts at dietary and pharmacological prevention of colorectal carcinoma development in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) have provided conflicting results. Immunosuppressive treatment with tacrolimus is known to be associated with an increased risk of malignancy and should be avoided in patients with high propensity for development of neoplasia. We observed a complete reversion of FAP phenotype in a male teenager carrying a germline mutation in APC gene who underwent a kidney transplant due to end-stage kidney disease secondary to congenital dysplastic kidneys. The patient was treated with tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil after transplantation. The possible chemopreventative role of these agents should be evaluated and confirmed in a larger cohort. The elucidation of molecular mechanisms underpinning the observed chemopreventative effect of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil might lead to the development of a novel colorectal cancer therapy.

16317745
Should children at risk for familial adenomatous polyposis be screened for hepatoblastoma and children with apparently sporadic hepatoblastoma be screened for APC germline mutations?
Background:
        
      
      Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most frequent liver tumor in childhood, occurring in the first few years of life. Surgery combined with chemotherapy has resulted in dramatic improvements in prognosis. However, even today, about one quarter of affected children do not survive the disease. Compared to the general population, the risk of HB is 750-7,500 times higher in children predisposed to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal-dominant cancer predispostion syndrome caused by germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene APC. Only limited data exist about the frequency of APC germline mutations in cases of apparently sporadic HB without a family history of FAP.

17169185
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis is a severe autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. It is characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of polyps in the gastrointestinal tract, primarily in the colon, at a mean age of 16 years. Without a colectomy, colon cancer is inevitable. FAP is caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. A couple was referred to Monash IVF following a request to undertake preimplantation genetic diagnosis for FAP. The female proband had an AGTT deletion mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene. Analysis of the APC-linked marker D5S346 showed that the parental alleles were fully informative. A multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was developed involving direct mutation detection and the co-analysis of D5S346 to identify allele drop out and avoid a misdiagnosis. The delAGTT mutation and D5S346 alleles were diagnosed by fluorescent PCR and allele sizing. Following standard hormone stimulation and IVF procedures, 14 oocytes were collected, 11 inseminated and nine embryos were biopsied on day 3. Of the nine embryos that were analysed, five embryos were affected and four were unaffected. Two unaffected embryos were transferred on day 4 resulting in a triplet pregnancy and the birth of three healthy babies.

10090483
Familial adenomatous polyposis coli: five novel mutations in exon 15 of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in Italian patients. Mutations in brief no. 225. Online
Germline mutations within the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a tumor suppressor gene, are responsible for most cases of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer. To date, more than 300 germ-line causative mutations within this gene have been described (Beroud and Soussi, 1996). Of these, about 95% are chain-terminating mutations, and more than 60% have been localized within exon 15 (Nagase and Nakamura, 1993, Beroud and Soussi, 1996). Using polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism, protein truncation test (PTT) and DNA sequencing we have identified five new frameshift mutations (2523insCTTA, 2638delA, 2803insA, 3185delAA, 4145delTCATGT), all occurring within exon 15 and giving rise to truncated protein products. Two of these new mutations are of particular interest because of the unusual phenotypic features shown by probands. The phenotype of the proband bearing the 2523insCTTA mutation at codon 842 was very aggressive with onset of the symptoms at 12 years, while the patient bearing the 3185delAA mutation at codon 1062 exhibited features of an attenuated form of FAP (AAPC). Our data reiterate the great heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in FAP that gives rise to an extreme variability of the clinical expression.

26141168
Multiple splenic hamartomas and familial adenomatous polyposis: a case report and review of the literature
Introduction:
        
      
      Splenoma or splenic hamartoma is a rare primary splenic tumor most often discovered radiologically and incidentally. Splenic hamartomas have a strong association with solid and hematological malignancies and, in rare cases, with tuberous sclerosis, but to the best of our knowledge no reports of splenic hamartomas associated with familial adenomatous polyposis have been documented, although it is recognized that familial adenomatous polyposis presents a variety of extracolonic manifestations.

34259353
Exome sequencing of familial adenomatous polyposis-like individuals identifies both known and novel causative genes
Inherited polyposis syndromes are predominantly caused by pathogenic variants in APC and are linked to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, after clinical screening, 20%-30% of individuals diagnosed with FAP do not carry a pathogenic variant in APC (often categorised as FAP-like). Other known inherited adenomatous polyposis syndromes such as MUTYH, POLD1/E, or NTHL1-associated polyposis only account for, 3 a fraction of the remaining cases. A cohort of 48 individuals clinically diagnosed with a FAP-like phenotype was selected based on a strong family history of colorectal cancer and no previous pathogenic variant found in APC and/or MUTYH, by genetic screening. Using whole exome sequencing, FAP-like patients were found to carry pathogenic variants in MUTYH, APC, POLE and TP53, as well as DNA-repair genes and inflammation related genes. Additionally, a comprehensive assessment of copy number variation revealed two loci of interest that appeared to be associated with polyposis risk. In total, 6 out of 48 polyposis were explained through re-sequencing. This study highlights the potential role of DNA-repair as well as inflammation-related variants towards polyp development.

26622826
Germline and somatic mutations of the APC gene in papillary thyroid carcinoma associated with familial adenomatous polyposis: Analysis of three cases and a review of the literature
Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which is caused by the dysfunction of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, have the possibility of developing extracolonic manifestations, including thyroid cancer (TC), congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, desmoid tumors, and gastric and duodenal adenomas. The pathogenesis of these disorders associated with FAP is considered to be affected by the site of the germline mutation on the APC gene as a genotype-phenotype correlation. Moreover, β-catenin binding sites consist of 20-amino acid repeats (20-AARs) in the APC protein, and they are essential for the development of colorectal adenomas and certain other extracolonic manifestations. The present study retrospectively analyzed the germline and somatic mutations of the APC gene in three papillary TC patients with FAP to analyze the association between the remaining number of 20-AARs and the development of TC. The mutation sites of two TCs did not include 20-AARs in each allele. In one patient, the remaining number of 20-AARs was two in the germline mutation and zero in the somatic mutation. Together with the data on 13 FAP-associated thyroid cancerous lesions in 3 FAP patients reported previously, the majority of the remaining numbers of 20-AARs was zero in the TC patients with FAP (13/16; 81.3%). Consequently, the APC/β-catenin signaling pathway may be strongly involved with the pathogenesis of TC with FAP. Further accumulation of FAP patients with TC will be required to confirm the molecular pathogenesis of TC.

1319838
Correlation between the location of germ-line mutations in the APC gene and the number of colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis patients
Recently we have isolated the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene which causes familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and its germ-line mutations in a substantial number of FAP patients have been identified. On the basis of this information, we compared the location of germ-line mutations in the APC gene in 22 unrelated patients (12 of whom have been reported previously) with the number of colorectal polyps developed in FAP patients; 17 were sparse types and five were profuse types. All but one of the mutations were considered to cause truncation of the gene product by frame-shift due to deletion (14 cases) or nonsense mutation (seven cases). The location of the germ-line mutations seems to correlate with the two clinical types; germ-line mutations in five FAP patients with profuse polyps were observed between codon 1250 and codon 1464, whereas mutations in 17 FAP patients with fewer polyps were observed in the other regions of the APC gene. The result suggests that the number of colorectal polyps in FAP patients may be associated with a difference in the stability or biological function of the truncated APC protein.

21866058
Hepatoblastoma as a result of APC gene mutation


15833136
Rare mutations predisposing to familial adenomatous polyposis in Greek FAP patients
Background:
        
      
      Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is caused by germline mutations in the APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) gene. The vast majority of APC mutations are point mutations or small insertions/deletions which lead to truncated protein products. Splicing mutations or gross genomic rearrangements are less common inactivating events of the APC gene.

22692730
Hepatoblastoma in two siblings and familial adenomatous polyposis: causal nexus or coincidence?
Infantile and childhood hepatoblastoma (HB) occurs more frequently in children with hereditary predisposition to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) than in the general population. The occurrence of HB in two infant siblings is reported. The sister died of the disease. The brother survived the HB and was later diagnosed with familial adenomatous polyposis and advanced rectal cancer. He was found to carry a germline mutation of the APC gene. Presuming that the HB in the two siblings was the first manifestation of FAP we performed APC mutation analysis in DNA from archived tumour tissue of his sister and in blood samples of both parents. Surprisingly, the mutation was neither found in both parents, nor in the tissue samples of the sister. We outline the impact of this finding for genetic counselling and review the literature on FAP and HB.

18393237
[Detection of adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutations in 31 familial adenomatous polyposis families by using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography]
Objective:
        
      
      To analyze the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in Chinese.

8390900
A novel mutation of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene in a familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patient and presymptomatic diagnosis using PCR


7866403
Characterization of two novel adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) manifest numerous colorectal adenomas as well as benign and malignant extra-colonic lesions. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations are the underlying genetic defect in FAP. We analyzed germline DNA of 81 unrelated FAP patients and evaluated correlation of APC mutation genotype and clinical phenotype. Germline APC mutations were identified in 18 FAP patients including two novel 2 bp deletions at APC codons 1067 and 1259. FAP patients were screened for hypertrophic ocular fundus lesions, desmoids and peri-ampullary adenomas. As reported previously (Olshwang et al 1993b), a positive correlation for the frequency of retinal lesions and germline APC mutation was observed among all FAP patients except one. No significant correlation was observed for APC mutation genotype and the occurrence of desmoids and peri-ampullary adenomas. Genetic factors contributing to familial segregation of these lesions need further investigation.

19593690
Relative role of APC and MUTYH mutations in the pathogenesis of familial adenomatous polyposis
Objective:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an interesting model for the study of colorectal tumour. Two genes contribute to the FAP phenotype - APC and MUTYH - but their relative role is still undefined. The objective of this study was to evaluate the contribution of the two genes to the pathogenesis of FAP by means of a series of FAP families.

28955048
A novel pathogenic single nucleotide germline deletion in APC gene in a four generation Chinese family with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant precancerous condition which is associated with germline mutations of the APC gene. Clinically, FAP is characterized by the development of multiple colorectal adenomas or polyps which finally result in colorectal cancer by the 40 years age of the patient, if no surgical interventions have been undertaken. In this study, we present a clinical molecular study of a four generation Chinese family with FAP. Diagnosis of FAP was made on the basis of clinical manifestations, family history and medical (colonoscopy and histopathology) records. Genetic screening of the proband and all affected family members were performed by targeted next-generation sequencing and confirmatory Sanger sequencing. Targeted next generation sequencing identified a germline novel heterozygous single nucleotide deletion [c.3418delC; p.Pro1140Leufs*25] in exon18 of APC gene, which segregated with the FAP phenotypes in the proband and in all the affected family members whereas absent in unaffected family members as well as in normal healthy controls of same ethnic origin. Our present study expands the mutational spectrum of APC gene and provides evidence to understand the function of APC gene in FAP.

18794146
One-hit effects in cancer: altered proteome of morphologically normal colon crypts in familial adenomatous polyposis
We studied patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) because they are virtually certain to develop colon cancer, and because much is known about the causative APC gene. We hypothesized that the inherited heterozygous mutation itself leads to changes in the proteome of morphologically normal crypts and the proteins that changed may represent targets for preventive and therapeutic agents. We determined the differential protein expression of morphologically normal colon crypts of FAP patients versus those of individuals without the mutation, using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, mass spectrometry, and validation by two-dimensional gel Western blotting. Approximately 13% of 1,695 identified proteins were abnormally expressed in the morphologically normal crypts of APC mutation carriers, indicating that a colon crypt cell under the one-hit state is already abnormal. Many of the expression changes affect pathways consistent with the function of the APC protein, including apoptosis, cell adhesion, cell motility, cytoskeletal organization and biogenesis, mitosis, transcription, and oxidative stress response. Thus, heterozygosity for a mutant APC tumor suppressor gene alters the proteome of normal-appearing crypt cells in a gene-specific manner, consistent with a detectable one-hit event. These changes may represent the earliest biomarkers of colorectal cancer development, potentially leading to the identification of molecular targets for cancer prevention.

21488257
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: APC. Disease: Adenomatous polyposis coli


16676398
Double frameshift mutations in APC and MSH2 in the same individual
Heterozygous germline DNA mismatch repair gene mutations are typically associated with HNPCC. Here we report the case of a proband whose father was known for familial adenomatous polyposis. The number of polyps (less than ten) was not typical of polyposis; therefore, the diagnosis of HNPCC was entertained. Microsatellite instability analyses were performed on peripheral blood and biopsy of a right-sided dysplastic adenoma. The tumor tissue showed high-grade instability, and a subsequent, immunohistochemistry showed that neither MSH2 nor MSH6 proteins were expressed in tumor cells. Prophylactic colectomy was performed, and an adenocarcinoma developing within the adenoma was diagnosed (pT1N0). Genomic DNA analysis revealed a novel mutation in MSH2 as a frameshift mutation in exon 7 (c.1191_1192dupG). Both parents of the proband were analysed for MSH2 and APC mutations, and in the father, a truncating mutation in exon 15 of APC was identified as del3471-3473GAGA. This mutation was found to be present in the proband. His mother was found to bear the MSH2 exon 7 mutation. At the follow-up, the proband was diagnosed with fundic, antral and duodenal adenomas (one fundic adenoma showed low-grade dysplasia). Several tubular rectal adenomas with low-grade dysplasia were excised. The patient later developed an intra-abdominal desmoid tumor.

15719192
Investigation of APC mutations in a Turkish familial adenomatous polyposis family by heterodublex analysis
Purpose:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by the presence of 100 or more colorectal adenomatous polyps. Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene are primarily responsible for the development of this disease. This study was designed to investigation of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations in members of familial adenomatous polyposis family to identify individuals at risk of the disease.

26416840
Two different nucleotide substitutions of APC gene in a family with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome leading to colorectal cancer. This disease appears as a result of germline mutation in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The aim of the present study is to report the association between two different nucleotide substitutions detected in a family with FAP. In the proband, p.His1172Gln (c.3516delT) was detected in exon 15 of the APC gene. Furthermore, p.His1172Gln (c.3516delT) and, in addition to this mutation, p.Met1413Val (c.4237 A > G) were detected in exon 15 in both daughters of the proband. However, we believe that single nucleotide change in codon 1413 may be a polymorphic variant and deletion T in codon 1172 of APC gene is associated with FAP, attenuated FAP and extracolonic FAP involvement. Along with common use of genetic tests in the clinical practice, genotype-phenotype correlation may be recognized better and useful for early diagnosis and prevention of familial cancer syndromes.

17696956
Deletion mutation of BRAF in a serrated adenoma from a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis
BRAF gene mutations in the colorectum have been associated with serrated adenomas and less frequently with hyperplastic polyps, villous adenomas, tubular adenomas, and carcinomas. Most BRAF mutations in the colon have been reported as a V600E substitution. We report a case with a very rare deletion mutation of BRAF (c.1799-1801delTGA, p.Val600_Lys601delinsGlu) in a serrated adenoma; the patient has familial adenomatous polyposis with a germline mutation of the APC gene (c.3578delA, p.Gln1193ArgfsX1264). Genetic studies on fundic gland polyps and tubular adenomas from the same patient failed to demonstrate BRAF mutation. This case is the first reported with a deletion mutation of BRAF found in the colon.

25559809
Genetic diagnosis of high-penetrance susceptibility for colorectal cancer (CRC) is achievable for a high proportion of familial CRC by exome sequencing
Purpose:
        
      
      Knowledge of the contribution of high-penetrance susceptibility to familial colorectal cancer (CRC) is relevant to the counseling, treatment, and surveillance of CRC patients and families.

16201232
[Detection of germline mutations in the APC gene with the protein truncation test]
The protein truncation test was established for analyzing mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene which plays an important role in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). The sites of APC mutations and the clinic features of FAP patients were examined to find the relationship between them. Genomic DNA, which was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of 22 FAP patients and the normal colon tissues of 43 sporadic colorectal cancers, were examined for mutations in exon15 of the APC gene by using PCR-TNT T7 Quick Coupled Tanscription/Translation System. The subsequent sequencing was used to confirm the mutation sites. Germline mutations were found in 5 of 22 FAP patients. All of the five mutations showed base pair deletions and led to produce truncated protein. No truncating germline mutation was found in normal tissues of 43 sporadic colorectal cancers. The protein truncation test is a sensitive and accurate technique to detect truncated mutations especially in the large exons of APC gene. It can be used as an routine method for assisting the early diagnosis of the FAP patients.

8111416
Simple, rapid, and accurate determination of deletion mutations by automated DNA sequencing of heteroduplex fragments of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene generated by PCR amplification
Germline mutations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. PCR products from heterozygous patients for deletions of this gene formed four distinct bands on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The four fragments were subsequently purified and both strands of each fragment were directly sequenced, using an automated DNA sequencer and the same primers as those for PCR amplification. It was found that the two slower migrating fragments were "bulge" heteroduplexes, while the other two were homoduplexes made up of two wild-type strands and two deletion-mutant strands, respectively. The sites of deletions in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene could be exactly determined in four of the five patients. In an attempt to identify deletion-carriers of familial adenomatous polyposis at the presymptomatic stage, a family study was also carried out, and two children were found to have the same mutations as those of their affected parents. The direct sequencing of heteroduplex fragments generated during PCR amplification is a potentially useful method for detecting mutations of not only the adenomatous polyposis coli gene but also many other genes of genetic diseases.

28282712
A Patient With Desmoid Tumors and Familial FAP Having Frame Shift Mutation of the APC Gene
Desmoids tumors, characterized by monoclonal proliferation of myofibroblasts, could occur in 5-10% of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as an extra-colonic manifestation of the disease. FAP can develop when there is a germ-line mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Although mild or attenuated FAP may follow mutations in 5΄ extreme of the gene, it is more likely that 3΄ extreme mutations haveamore severe manifestation of thedisease. A 28-year-old woman was admitted to the Cancer Institute of Iran with an abdominal painful mass. She had strong family history of FAP and underwent prophylactic total colectomy. Pre-operative CT scans revealed a large mass. Microscopic observation showed diffuse fibroblast cell infiltration of the adjacent tissue structures. Peripheral blood DNA extraction followed by adenomatous polyposis coli gene exon by exon sequencing was performed to investigate the mutation in adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Analysis of DNA sequencing demonstrated a mutation of 4 bpdeletions at codon 1309-1310 of the exon 16 of adenomatous polyposis coli gene sequence which was repeated in 3 members of the family. Some of them had desmoid tumor without classical FAP history. Even when there is no familial history of adenomatous polyposis, the adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutation should be investigated in cases of familial desmoids tumors for a suitable prevention. The 3΄ extreme of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene is still the best likely location in such families.

24664542
Two Chinese pedigrees for adenomatous polyposis coli: new mutations at codon 1309 and predisposition to phenotypic variations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease caused by a mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Some studies have attempted to correlate mutations at codon 1309 with classic FAP (≥100 colorectal polyps). We report two Chinese FAP pedigrees with new frameshift mutations at codon 1309, in which affected individuals manifest phenotypic variations. Comprehensive physical examinations were performed for all living individuals and the medical data of deceased patients were collected. Screening of the APC and human mutY homolog (MUTYH) genes for germline mutations was conducted by direct polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing. In two pedigrees, a heterozygous deletion in exon 16 of the APC gene was present in all FAP patients but absent in the unaffected individuals. There were no changes to the MUTYH gene. The first pedigree, with a new frameshift mutation at c.3926_3930 del AAAAG (p. Glu1309Aspfs X4), exhibited obvious differences in the polyp number such that the proband manifested only three colorectal polyps, whereas another patients showed the symptoms of classic FAP. The second pedigree, also traced a new mutation at c.3922_3925 del AAAG (p. Glu1309Argfs X11). Although all of the patients presented with classic polyposis, one of them exhibited a delayed onset of colorectal cancer in his 50s. Two novel mutations at codon 1309 in two Chinese families suffering from FAP could enrich the germline mutation spectrum of the APC gene. Families of individuals might manifest different phenotypes, even with an identical codon 1309 mutation, unlike in previous studies.

31916644
Reclassification of a frequent African-origin variant from PMS2 to the pseudogene PMS2CL
Genomic analysis has become a mainstay in the investigation of cancer patients, especially for those suspected of harboring a heritable cancer predisposition syndrome. With ubiquitous short-read next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, these analyses can be complicated by the inappropriate alignment of variants to homologous genomic regions or pseudogenes. Using distinct primer sets specific to the gene and pseudogene, a nonspecific primer set, and a highly gene-specific long-range polymerase chain reaction primer set, we have shown that in at least a subset of patients, the common African PMS2 variant NM_000535.5:c.2182_2184delACTinsG, classified as pathogenic in ClinVar, has been incorrectly assigned to PMS2 from its well-documented pseudogene, PMS2CL. This result is not only important for patients but also highlights a weakness in short-read NGS technologies and the racial inequity in genomic analysis.

26309368
Presence of c.3956delC mutation in familial adenomatous polyposis patients from Brazil
Aim:
        
      
      To characterize APC gene mutations and correlate them with patient phenotypes in individuals diagnosed with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in northern Brazil.

27816598
Distinct Patterns of Somatic Mosaicism in the APC Gene in Neoplasms From Patients With Unexplained Adenomatous Polyposis
We investigated the presence and patterns of mosaicism in the APC gene in patients with colon neoplasms not associated with any other genetic variants; we performed deep sequence analysis of APC in at least 2 adenomas or carcinomas per patient. We identified mosaic variants in APC in adenomas from 9 of the 18 patients with 21 to approximately 100 adenomas. Mosaic variants of APC were variably detected in leukocyte DNA and/or non-neoplastic intestinal mucosa of these patients. In a comprehensive sequence analysis of 1 patient, we found no evidence for mosaicism in APC in non-neoplastic intestinal mucosa. One patient was found to carry a mosaic c.4666dupA APC variant in only 10 of 16 adenomas, indicating the importance of screening 2 or more adenomas for genetic variants.

11668620
Mutation analysis of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in northwest Spanish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and sporadic colorectal cancer
Germline mutations in the tumor-suppresor APC gene are associated with hereditary familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and somatic mutations are common in sporadic colorectal cancer. In this study, we report the identification of three novel germline mutations: 1682-1683insA, 3252-3253insAT, 3544A>T and a new somatic mutation 4130-4131delTT, all giving rise to truncated APC proteins. The majority of the mutations we found originate a truncated APC protein and cause the FAP phenotype. However, special attention must be given to the missense mutations Asp1822Val and Ser2621Cys since their segregation with the FAP phenotype is questionable. In our FAP families we did not find any genetical alterations at codon 1309, being this mutation the most frequent reported in APC. Differences in the recurrence of pathological mutations in APC could exist among populations. However, epidemiological studies must be performed to confirm this hypothesis.

22658618
ColoSeq provides comprehensive lynch and polyposis syndrome mutational analysis using massively parallel sequencing
Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer) and adenomatous polyposis syndromes frequently have overlapping clinical features. Current approaches for molecular genetic testing are often stepwise, taking a best-candidate gene approach with testing of additional genes if initial results are negative. We report a comprehensive assay called ColoSeq that detects all classes of mutations in Lynch and polyposis syndrome genes using targeted capture and massively parallel next-generation sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq2000 instrument. In blinded specimens and colon cancer cell lines with defined mutations, ColoSeq correctly identified 28/28 (100%) pathogenic mutations in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, EPCAM, APC, and MUTYH, including single nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions and deletions, and large copy number variants. There was 100% reproducibility of detection mutation between independent runs. The assay correctly identified 222 of 224 heterozygous SNVs (99.4%) in HapMap samples, demonstrating high sensitivity of calling all variants across each captured gene. Average coverage was greater than 320 reads per base pair when the maximum of 96 index samples with barcodes were pooled. In a specificity study of 19 control patients without cancer from different ethnic backgrounds, we did not find any pathogenic mutations but detected two variants of uncertain significance. ColoSeq offers a powerful, cost-effective means of genetic testing for Lynch and polyposis syndromes that eliminates the need for stepwise testing and multiple follow-up clinical visits.

18704758
Identification of somatic APC mutations in recurrent desmoid tumors in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis to determine actual recurrence of the original tumor or de novo occurrence
A 25-year-old female with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) presented with an abdominal tumor just below the scar due to a colectomy performed 15 months previously. This tumor (tumor A) measured 7 cm in diameter, was diagnosed as a desmoid tumor of the abdominal wall, and was excised. Despite the subsequent administration of sulindac (300 mg daily for 1 year), a desmoid tumor recurred at the same site. Excision was performed again when the tumor was 8 cm in diameter, and examination revealed it to consist of a large tumor (B) and a small tumor (C) that bulged out from tumor B. Germ-line APC analysis showed a C deletion at codon 1460 resulting in a stop codon. Two somatic mutations were observed in tumor A: a TCAA deletion at codon 1068 and a deletion of a codon at bp 1192-2097. In tumor B, a somatic mutation was found at codon 1041 changing CAA to TAA. We could not detect any somatic mutations in tumor C. We conclude that somatic mutation analysis of the APC gene can be used to identify whether a recurrent desmoid tumor in a patient with FAP is a new primary tumor or a recurrence from microscopic remnants of the original tumor.

29026543
From Gardner fibroma diagnosis to constitutional APC mutation detection: a one-way street
We report a young child without a family history of FAP, who promptly underwent APC testing after the histological confirmation of a paraspinal GAF that was not isolated. Our case report reinforces the suggestion advanced by previous authors for an APC analysis in all patients with GAF.

26840078
Gardner Fibroma: Clinical and Histopathologic Implications of Germline APC Mutation Association
The proportion and clinical characteristics of Gardner fibromas (GAFs) that are sporadic versus familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)-associated have not been clearly established. We report on 7 patients diagnosed with GAF who underwent APC sequencing and duplication/deletion testing. Three (43%) were found to have underlying APC germline perturbations consistent with FAP; these patients had multifocal (1) or large; unresectable (2) GAFs. The 4 patients with negative APC testing each had a single resectable GAF. β-catenin reactivity was noted in all FAP-associated GAFs and in 1/4 APC wild-type cases. FAP-associated GAFs may be less common than sporadic GAFs and can demonstrate clinically distinct features.

28018803
Neonatal Gardner Fibroma Leads to Detection of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis: Two Case Reports
Gardner fibromas (GFs) have only recently been described as poorly circumscribed tumor-like lesions, which are exceedingly rare in children. GFs are associated with APC gene mutations and therefore with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). So far there is only very limited literature on GF in the neonatal period. We present two children with GF diagnosed at birth and subsequent FAP with very different clinical courses. In one case, the disease led to extensive surgery of the thoracic wall and detection of FAP in the father with the need of immediate proctocolectomy. In the other patient (with a positive family history for FAP) the disease remained stable. Our cases indicate that the diagnosis of GF in the neonatal period requires the exclusion of FAP both in the child as well as the parents. Since the clinical behavior of GF cannot be predicted, continuous monitoring is mandatory. Depending on tumor site and growth, individual therapeutic options must be thoroughly considered. Surgical resection, if necessary, has to be inevitably total to prevent recurrence.

21059714
Neonatal Gardner fibroma: a sentinel presentation of severe familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare cause of colorectal cancer and rarely presents in early childhood. Various extracolonic manifestations, however, may be present before the development of overt polyposis. One of the rarest manifestations is the Gardner fibroma (GAF), which has particular histologic features. Here we report the case of a child who presented in the neonatal period with a paraspinal mass. Although the initial diagnosis was unclear, biopsy of a second lesion at 32 months of age, and a review of the first lesion, resulted in the diagnosis of GAF. After rectal bleeding at 47 months, colonoscopy revealed 75 to 100 colonic polyps. Adenomas were identified in multiple biopsies throughout the colon and from several polyps located in the duodenum. Polyps were visualized in the jejunum by wireless-capsule endoscopy. A total proctocolectomy was performed, and no malignant transformation was observed in the colon on pathologic inspection. A truncating mutation in APC (c.4479_4480delGG p.Glu1494LysfsX19) was identified in the child. Her parents and sister do not carry this mutation in lymphocyte DNA. To our knowledge, this is the first report of neonatal GAF as the presenting feature of a molecularly confirmed case of sporadic FAP and the earliest colonic and small bowel involvement reported of FAP. It illustrates the need to exclude FAP in a child who harbors fibromas suggestive of GAF, even in the absence of supportive evidence of FAP in the patient or relatives.

9391252
Severe upper gastrointestinal polyposis associated with sparse colonic polyposis in a familial adenomatous polyposis family with an APC mutation at codon 1520
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis usually results in colonic polyposis with hundreds to thousands of polyps, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE), and variable extracolonic features. Recent reports indicate that patients with distal mutations between codons 1445 and 1578 do not express CHRPE and have a high incidence of desmoid tumours.

8162051
Regionally clustered APC mutations are associated with a severe phenotype and occur at a high frequency in new mutation cases of adenomatous polyposis coli
Germline mutation in APC at 5q21-22 results in the dominantly inherited syndrome adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). Somatic mutation in this gene is an early event in colorectal tumourigenesis. Both types of mutation are concentrated in the 5' half of exon 15. We have used single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and heteroduplex analysis to screen for variants in this region of the gene in a total of 45 affected but unrelated individuals. Eighteen patients had no family history of the disease; of these 11 were classified as having a severe phenotype, based on an early age at presentation or cancer development. This compared with 6 of 27 familial cases. A 5 bp deletion at codon 1309 reported to occur in 10-15% of unselected APC patients worldwide, was found in 5 of the 18 new mutation cases and 4 of the 27 familial cases: all nine were classed as severe. A further 3 new mutations and 1 familial mutation were located downstream from codon 1309, these individuals similarly being classed as phenotypically severe. In contrast all of the APC mutations detected in affected individuals with an average phenotype were located prior to codon 1309. The frequent association of a severe phenotype with fresh mutation may explain the apparent conflict of a high mutation rate (20-30%) in a condition, which on average, is lethal at a post-reproductive age.

20063100
[Gardner fibroma: case report and discussion of a new soft tissue tumor entity]
Gardner fibroma represents a rare and recently described soft tissue tumor entity in children and young adults. It consists of haphazardly arranged coarse and hyalinized collagen fibers combined with loosely arranged bland spindle and fibroblastic cells. The case of a 13-year-old male patient with Gardner fibroma and osteoma and multicentric desmoid type fibromatosis in his mother is presented with detection of a (heterozygotic) germline mutation of the APC gene leading to a de novo stop codon (deletion of base pairs 5033-5036). FISH analysis revealed a structural loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the APC gene on chromosomal locus 5q21 in one out of five analysed desmoids of the mother, no LOH of APC gene in the Gardner fibroma. Gardner fibroma in children and young adults may serve as an indicator lesion for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Gardner syndrome, a familial desmoid type fibromatosis without other manifestations of APC or a new APC gene mutation. For the clinician, this diagnosis should be commented upon accordingly by the surgical pathologist. As the result of a detected APC gene mutation, continuous follow-up for the development of colorectal tumors and desmoid type fibromatosis as well as a familial screening for FAP is recommended.

15095859
A case of Gardner syndrome with a mutation at codon 1556 of APC: a suggested case of genotype-phenotype correlation in dental abnormality
A 25-year-old man with suspected Gardner syndrome was introduced to our hospital by a dentist who, during examination of the patient, had found dental dysplasias and multiple osteomas of the jaw. Radiographs, endoscopy and biopsies revealed adenomatous polyposis of the colon. Genetic analysis of peripheral lymphocytes revealed a one-base deletion at codon 1556 in exon 15 of APC, which caused a frame shift and a premature stop at codon 1564. The pedigree analysis demonstrated five patients in his family who presented with dental abnormality and osteomas in addition to adenomatous polyposis of the colon. Although the relationship between the location of APC mutations and dental abnormalities remains controversial, this case supports the hypothesis that a mutation at around codon 1556 of APC is closely associated with dental abnormality and osteomas.

8655134
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis due to a mutation in the 3' part of the APC gene. A clue for understanding the function of the APC protein
The identification of germline mutations in a large number of clinically well-characterised patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) has allowed the unravelling of several genotype-phenotype relationships that can now be interpreted in the light of the structure and functional domains of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein. An attenuated phenotype has been found to be associated with mutations at the 5' end of the gene, while a severe clinical expression was found in patients with the most common mutation at codon 1309. So far, only few mutations in the 3' half of the gene have been published. We report on two families with a rather mild phenotype due to a frameshift mutation at codon 1597. These families may represent a clue for defining a 5' border for the occurrence of a second region of attenuated FAP that is localised in the 3' part of the APC gene. We propose a model to explain the relationship between the severity of the disease and the size of the mutant APC protein.

8931709
Germline mutations in the 3' part of APC exon 15 do not result in truncated proteins and are associated with attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer characterized by the development of numerous adenomatous polyps predominantly in the colorectal region. Germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are responsible for most cases of FAP. Mutations at the 5' end of APC are known to be associated with a relatively mild form of the disease, called attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC). We identified a frameshift mutation in the 3' part of exon 15, resulting in a stop codon at 1862, in a large Dutch kindred with AAPC. Western blot analysis of lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from affected family members from this kindred, as well as from a previously reported Swiss family carrying a frameshift mutation at codon 1987 and displaying a similar attenuated phenotype, showed only the wild-type APC protein. Our study indicates that chain-terminating mutations located in the 3' part of APC do not result in detectable truncated polypeptides and we hypothesize that this is likely to be the basis for the observed AAPC phenotype.

26023681
Use of Whole Genome Sequencing for Diagnosis and Discovery in the Cancer Genetics Clinic
Despite the potential of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to improve patient diagnosis and care, the empirical value of WGS in the cancer genetics clinic is unknown. We performed WGS on members of two cohorts of cancer genetics patients: those with BRCA1/2 mutations (n = 176) and those without (n = 82). Initial analysis of potentially pathogenic variants (PPVs, defined as nonsynonymous variants with allele frequency < 1% in ESP6500) in 163 clinically-relevant genes suggested that WGS will provide useful clinical results. This is despite the fact that a majority of PPVs were novel missense variants likely to be classified as variants of unknown significance (VUS). Furthermore, previously reported pathogenic missense variants did not always associate with their predicted diseases in our patients. This suggests that the clinical use of WGS will require large-scale efforts to consolidate WGS and patient data to improve accuracy of interpretation of rare variants. While loss-of-function (LoF) variants represented only a small fraction of PPVs, WGS identified additional cancer risk LoF PPVs in patients with known BRCA1/2 mutations and led to cancer risk diagnoses in 21% of non-BRCA cancer genetics patients after expanding our analysis to 3209 ClinVar genes. These data illustrate how WGS can be used to improve our ability to discover patients' cancer genetic risks.

17426470
3' Mutation of the APC gene and family history of FAP in a patient with apparently sporadic desmoid tumors
Desmoid tumors may occur sporadically or as part of the extraintestinal manifestations of familial adenomatous polyposis. Different phenotypes have been described and some genotype-phenotype correlations have been raised, associated with different sites of germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. We report on a 42-year-old woman ascertained for a large desmoid tumor of the anterior chest wall with pleural involvement, which persistently recurred despite a decade of treatment including hormone therapy, chemotherapy, and surgery. Spontaneous disappearance of the tumor was later noted after 1 year without any treatment and confirmed after 4 years of regular follow-up. Repeated colonoscopies were normal in the proband and DNA sequencing showed a frameshift mutation due to a single adenosine deletion at position 5772 (codon 1924). This mutation, located in the exon 15 at the 3' end of the APC gene, leads to an unusual and late onset phenotype. The pedigree revealed other isolated or familial adenomatous polyposis-associated cases of desmoid tumors. This family report shows that a molecular analysis of the APC gene should be performed in familial desmoid tumors for accurate genetic counseling and follow-up.

32504335
Serrated adenomas with a BRAF mutation in a young patient with familial adenomatous polyposis
Introduction:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is typically characterized by more than hundred adenomatous polyps in the colorectum, caused by germline APC mutation. A small proportion of the polyps progress to colorectal adenocarcinoma via adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Serrated lesions and polyps, characterized by a serrated architecture of the epithelium, are noted for two types of genetic pathways in colorectal carcinogenesis. BRAF and KRAS mutations are observed in the serrated pathway.

32543103
Genetic alteration of colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence among gastric adenocarcinoma and dysplastic lesions in a patient with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is characterized by colorectal polyposis and adenocarcinoma that is frequently accompanied by extracolonic neoplasm. The risk of gastric carcinoma is increasing in Western FAP patients as well as Asian patients.

8968744
Familial infiltrative fibromatosis (desmoid tumours) (MIM135290) caused by a recurrent 3' APC gene mutation
Desmoid tumours are generally very rare but occur about 100 times more frequently in the colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome familial adenomatous polyposis (MIM 175100), being represented in about 10% of patients. In addition to desmoid disease occurring in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) there exist familial infiltrative fibromatosis (MIM 135290) kindreds where there is no evidence of FAP. Previously we have described a kindred with familial infiltrative fibromatosis (FIF) in which desmoid tumours were associated with nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. FAP is caused by mutations in the APC gene and various genotype-phenotype relationships have been defined including reports that colorectal polyposis is less severe with mutations 5' to codon 157 and that the risk of desmoid tumours is high in FAP patients with APC gene mutations between codons 1444 and 1598. There is relatively little information on the phenotype of APC gene mutations 3' to codon 1598; however, one large family has been reported with a mutation at codon 1987 which presents with a highly variable phenotype which includes desmoid disease. We screened our original FIF kindred and three further families with a similar phenotype for mutations in the APC gene. A 4 bp frameshift deletion in codon 1962 was identified in the original FIF kindred and two further apparently unrelated families. Haplotype analysis suggests a common origin for the APC mutation in all three families. Affected individuals had no evidence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium. Colorectal polyposis was variable, and most affected patients had either none or a few late onset polyps. These findings demonstrate (i) that FAP and FIF are allelic, and (ii) that APC gene mutations which truncate the APC protein distal to the beta-catenin binding domain are associated with desmoid tumours, absent CHRPE and variable but attenuated polyposis expression.

25074465
Identification of previously unrecognized FAP in children with Gardner fibroma
Fibromatous soft tissue lesions, namely desmoid-type fibromatosis and Gardner fibroma, may occur sporadically or as a result of inherited predisposition (as part of familial adenomatous polyposis, FAP). Whereas desmoid-type fibromatosis often present β-catenin overexpression (by activating CTNNB1 somatic variants or APC biallelic inactivation), the pathogenetic mechanisms in Gardner fibroma are unknown. We characterized in detail Gardner fibromas diagnosed in two infants to evaluate their role as sentinel lesions of previously unrecognized FAP. In the first infant we found a 5q deletion including APC in the tumor and the novel APC variant c.4687dup in constitutional DNA. In the second infant we found the c.5826_5829del and c.1678A>T APC variants in constitutional and tumor DNA, respectively. None of the constitutional APC variants occurred de novo and both tumors showed nuclear staining for β-catenin and no CTNNB1 variants. We present the first comprehensive characterization of the pathogenetic mechanisms of Gardner fibroma, which may be a sentinel lesion of previously unrecognized FAP families.

31101557
Outcomes of disease-specific next-generation sequencing gene panel testing in adolescents and young adults with colorectal cancer
Purpose:
        
      
      Adolescents and young adults with colorectal cancer (CRC) have attracted recent attention, with a hereditary syndrome identified in one-third of patients diagnosed ≤ 35. We aimed to study this population to determine if a CRC-specific gene panel increased the yield of testing.

9207294
The clinical correlates of a 3' truncating mutation (codons 1982-1983) in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, and different mutations may produce different clinical pictures. Most mutations occur in the 5' half of the gene, and mutations toward the 3' end are rare. The aim of this study was to document the phenotypes in a family with a truncating mutation at codons 1982-1983, one of the most 3' mutations on record. Colonic polyps in this family were much less numerous, and their growth was delayed compared with the classical FAP picture, and malignant degeneration occurred considerably later. Two individuals had sparse colonic but profuse gastric fundic gland polyposis. Gardner's syndrome stigmata were variable, and a desmoid tumor was recorded in 1 person.

7797123
Novel germline APC gene mutation in a large familial adenomatous polyposis kindred displaying variable phenotypes
The APC gene is mutated in the germline of people from families where there is a predisposition to develop polyposis coli. Many mutations have been described but the relation between their site and the phenotypic expression of the disease remains unclear. The most commonly seen mutation occurs at codon 1309. Many other mutations have been described towards the 5' end of exon 15 of the APC gene but comparatively few have been seen towards the 3' end. Recent reports have indicated the possibility of a functional boundary with respect to severity and age of onset of disease, which lies towards the 5' end of the gene. This report describes a large family whose affected members present with a very variable phenotype ranging from an early onset and severe form to a comparatively mild later onset one. The mutation that predisposes to disease in this family is at a previously undescribed site that lies towards the 3' end of exon 15 of the APC gene, which results in a stop codon. Interestingly, the stop codon is 63 codons downstream of the mutation and therefore may affect the expression of the disease. The addition of this mutation to the growing list of mutations described in the APC gene may provide some insight into the genotype/phenotype relation of the disease thus contributing to the understanding and significance of mutations at specific sites in the APC gene.

14735163
Exclusion of an extracolonic disease modifier locus on chromosome 1p33-36 in a large Swiss familial adenomatous polyposis kindred
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome, displays considerable inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity, which represents a major problem in genetic counselling of APC mutation carriers. The Min mouse model indicated a putative disease modifier locus on chromosome 4, which is syntenic to human chromosome 1p35-36. This finding was subsequently supported by parametric and nonparametric linkage analyses in FAP families, however, without identifying functional variants in candidate genes. Recently, germline mutations in the base-excision repair gene MYH (1p33-34) have been described in patients with multiple adenomas, pointing to a possible role as disease modifier in FAP. Here, we present critical reassessment of one of the largest FAP kindreds published, which was previously used in linkage mapping of 1p35-36. In this family, all affected members harbour the same APC germline mutation (5945delA), but display marked phenotypic variability, in particular regarding the occurrence of extracolonic disease that segregates in several branches of the family tree. Using updated clinical information, additional mutation carriers and polymorphic markers, fine mapping of the critical region as well as mutation analysis of the MYH gene were performed. These investigations allowed us to significantly exclude (i) the 1p33-36 region as a modifier locus and (ii) MYH as a modifier gene for extracolonic disease in this FAP kindred. Our results do not eliminate 1p33-36 from suspicion in other families, but clearly indicate that in our family linkage analysis of further putative candidate regions is necessary to identify a disease modifier locus in FAP.

23114473
Recurrent desmoids determine outcome in patients with Gardner syndrome: a cohort study of three generations of an APC mutation-positive family across 30 years
Purpose:
        
      
      Screening of Gardner syndrome (GS) patients is tailored towards prevention of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, many patients suffer from desmoid tumors, which are challenging to treat due to invasive growth and local recurrence. The aims of our study were to determine the effectiveness of screening in GS and analyze outcome of desmoid tumors by treatment modality.

27081525
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis with desmoids caused by an APC mutation
We present here a case of attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) with a family history of desmoids and thyroid tumors. This patient had no colonic polyps but did have multiple desmoids. Genetic analysis identified a 4-bp deletion in codon 2644 (c.7932_7935delTTAT: p.Tyr2645LysfsX14) of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. In cases with limited numbers of colonic polyps and desmoids, AFAP may be caused by a mutation in the 3' region of APC.

29954149
APC and MUTYH Analysis in FAP Patients: A Novel Mutation in APC Gene and Genotype-Phenotype Correlation
APC and MUTYH genes are mutated in 70⁻90% and 10⁻30% of familial adenomatous polyposis cases (FAP) respectively. An association between mutation localization and FAP clinical phenotype is reported. The aims of this study were to determine APC and MUTYH mutational status in a small cohort of FAP patients and to evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlation in mutated patients. Here, we report the identification of a novel APC germline mutation, c.510_511insA. Overall, mutational analysis showed pathogenic mutations in 6/10 patients: 5/10 in APC and 1/10 in MUTYH. Additionally, we found three variants of unknown significance in MUTYH gene that showed no evidence of possible splicing defects by in silico analysis. Molecular analysis was also extended to family members of mutated patients. A genotype-phenotype correlation was observed for colonic signs whereas a variation of disease onset age was revealed for the same mutation. Moreover, we found an intrafamilial variability of FAP onset age. Regarding extracolonic manifestations, the development of desmoid tumors was related to surgery and not to mutation position, while a genotype-phenotype correspondence was observed for the onset of thyroid or gastric cancer. These findings can be useful in association to clinical data for early surveillance and suitable treatment of FAP patients.

15131404
Intron 4 mutation in APC gene results in splice defect and attenuated FAP phenotype
The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein is a tumor suppressor frequently involved in the development of inherited and sporadic colon cancers. Somatic mutations of the APC gene are found in 80% of all colon cancers. Inherited mutations result in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as well as an attenuated form of this syndrome. FAP is characterized by the early age onset of hundreds to thousands of colonic adenomatous polyps and a virtual certainty of colon cancer unless the colon is removed. The attenuated form of FAP (AFAP) is characterized by fewer adenomas, later onset of adenomas and cancer, and a decreased lifetime cancer risk. We report a 37-year-old man with a history of more than 50 colonic adenomatous polyps, located predominately in the right colon. An insertion of a single thymidine between the second and third base pairs of intron 4 of the APC gene was identified (c.531+2_531+3insT). Monoallelic hybrid cells harboring a single copy of human chromosome 5 were generated from patient lymphoblasts. Sequencing of the APC cDNA product from these cells revealed a single RNA transcript with aberrant splicing in the mutant mRNA whereby exon 4 is deleted. The translational reading frame is shifted after codon 140 and a translational stop is generated predicting a truncated protein of 147 amino acids, thus indicating that the intronic mutation is disease causing. The lack of a secondary transcript from the mutant allele suggests that incomplete exon skipping is not the molecular mechanism behind the attenuated phenotype.

28792655
Multiple pilomatrixomas in a survivor of WNT-activated medulloblastoma leading to the discovery of a germline APC mutation and the diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis
Because children diagnosed with WNT-activated medulloblastoma have a 10-year overall survival rate of 95%, active long-term follow-up is critically important in reducing mortality from other causes. Here, we describe an 11-year-old adopted female who developed multiple pilomatrixomas 3 years after diagnosis of WNT-activated medulloblastoma, an unusual finding that prompted deeper clinical investigation. A heterozygous germline APC gene mutation was discovered, consistent with familial adenomatous polyposis. Screening endoscopy revealed numerous precancerous polyps that were excised. This case highlights the importance of long-term follow-up of pediatric cancer survivors, including attention to unexpected symptoms, which might unveil an underlying cancer predisposition syndrome.

30256815
A neoepitope derived from a novel human germline APC gene mutation in familial adenomatous polyposis shows selective immunogenicity
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited condition arising from genetic defects in the Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Carriers with mutations in the APC gene develop polyps in the colon and rectum which if not managed, transition into colon cancer. In this study, we identified a novel germline mutation in the APC gene in members of an FAP-affected (Familial adenomatous polyposis) family. This unique heterozygous variant (c.735_736insT; p.Ser246PhefsTer6) was identified in ten out of twenty six family members, ranging in age from 6 to 60 years. Polyps were detected in six of the ten individuals (35-60 years) carrying this mutation. The remaining four members (6-23 years) remain polyp free. A significant fraction of FAP affected individuals eventually develop colon cancer and therapeutic interventions to prevent cancer progression remain elusive. To address this issue, we sought to determine if peptides derived from the novel APC mutation could induce a cytotoxic T cell response, thereby qualifying them as vaccine candidates. Peptides harboring the variant amino acids were first interrogated in silico for their immunogenicity using a proprietary neoepitope prioritization pipeline, OncoPeptVAC. A single 9-mer peptide was predicted to be immunogenic. Remarkably, CD8+ T cells isolated from either an FAP+/ APCmut individual, or from a FAP-/ APCmut individual, failed to respond to the peptide, whereas those from either an unaffected family member (FAP-/ APCwt) or from healthy unrelated donors, showed a robust response, suggesting that CD8+ T cells from individuals carrying this germline APC mutation have been tolerized to the mutation. Furthermore, experimental testing of six additional reported APC gene mutation-derived peptides revealed one of the six to be immunogenic. While not all APC mutant peptides are inmmunogenic, a few qualify as vaccine candidates offering novel treatment opportunities to patients with somatic APC gene mutations to delay/treat colorectal cancer.

28125078
Frequent inactivating germline mutations in DNA repair genes in patients with Ewing sarcoma
Purpose:
        
      
      Ewing sarcoma is a small round blue cell tumor that is highly malignant and predominantly affects the adolescent and young adult population. It has long been suspected that a genetic predisposition exists for this cancer, but the germ-line genetic underpinnings of this disease have not been well established.

10562580
Notable intrafamilial phenotypic variability in a kindred with familial adenomatous polyposis and an APC mutation in exon 9
Background:
        
      
      The phenotypic spectrum of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) varies from the classic appearance of hundreds of adenomatous colonic polyps in the young adult and early onset colorectal cancer, to the occurrence of sparse adenomas in the older adult, "attenuated" FAP, due to mutations at the 5' or 3' ends of the APC gene.

26511139
Correlation between mutations and mRNA expression of APC and MUTYH genes: new insight into hereditary colorectal polyposis predisposition
Background:
        
      
      Transcript dosage imbalance may influence the transcriptome. To gain insight into the role of altered gene expression in hereditary colorectal polyposis predisposition, in the present study we analyzed absolute and allele-specific expression (ASE) of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and mutY Homolog (MUTYH) genes.

23291410
Novel insertion mutation p.Asp610GlyfsX23 in APC gene causes familial adenomatous polyposis in Chinese families
Objective:
        
      
      The aim of the study was to identify the causative gene defects associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in two Chinese pedigrees.

8910893
Mutation detection in exons 1-14 of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene: identification of an alternatively spliced transcript
Mutations in the APC gene are responsible for the dominantly inherited colon cancer syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). We have designed PCR primers which allow amplification by RT-PCR of exons 1-14 of the APC gene in six overlapping segments. The amplicons have been screened for the presence of mutations in patients affected with FAP using heteroduplex analysis. One patient has been identified with an alternatively spliced transcript involving exon 14 and a single base insertion mutation within the same exon.

20564245
APC mutations are associated with increased bone mineral density in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
The canonical Wnt pathway plays a key regulatory role in osteoblastogenesis and bone mass acquisition through its main effector, β-catenin. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) represents the key intracellular gatekeeper of β-catenin turnover, and heterozygous germ-line mutations in the APC gene cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Whether APC mutations affect bone mass has not been previously investigated. We conducted a cross-sectional study evaluating skeletal status in FAP patients with a documented APC mutation. Twenty-two FAP patients with a mean age of 42 years (54.5% women) were included in this study. Mean bone mineral density (BMD) Z-scores were significantly increased above normal at all measured sites: lumbar spine (p < .01), total hip (p < .01), femoral neck (p < .05), and trochanter (p < .01). Z-scores were +1 or greater in 14 patients (63.6%) and +2 or greater in 5 (22.7%). Mean values of bone turnover markers were within normal ranges. There was a significant positive correlation between procollagen type I N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) and β-crosslaps (β-CTX) (r = 0.70, p < .001) and between these markers and sclerostin and BMD measurements. We demonstrate that FAP patients display a significantly higher than normal mean BMD compared with age- and sex-matched healthy controls in the presence of a balanced bone turnover. Our data suggest a state of "controlled" activation of the Wnt signaling pathway in heterozygous carriers of APC mutations, most likely owing to upregulation of cytoplasmic β-catenin levels.

8385047
Detection of 12 germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene by polymerase chain reaction
Background:
        
      
      The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene at chromosome 5q21 that is responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) was recently isolated, and germ-line mutations in a substantial number of FAP families were characterized. Based on this information, the authors attempted to develop a presymptomatic diagnosis test for members of families that carry FAP.

21653199
Detection of APC germ line mosaicism in patients with de novo familial adenomatous polyposis: a plea for the protein truncation test
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inherited colorectal cancer predisposition caused by germ line mutations in the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene. Current recommendations for APC mutation analysis advise full gene sequencing to identify point mutations and small insertions/deletions as well as the multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique to detect gene dosage alterations. Use of the protein truncation test (PTT) as a pre-screening tool has thus been largely replaced with direct end-to-end sequencing, mainly because of its limited sensitivity and failure to identify APC missense alterations.

11741105
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium and APC mutations in Chinese with familial adenomatous polyposis
Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) often cause both congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). To investigate the relationship between APC mutations, CHRPE and FAP, all FAP patients at the Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, were asked to participate in a study. Ten Chinese patients from 6 kindreds and their family members volunteered, along with 12 healthy control subjects selected among hospital visitors and staff. All were examined for dilated fundus by indirect ophthalmoscopy. Mutations in APC coding exons were detected by sequencing. In one FAP patient, a novel A insertion at codon 1023 was detected. Three previously reported mutations were detected in 6 FAP patients: a deletion of ACAAA at codon 1061, and 2 truncating point substitutions at codons 216 and 283. In 3 FAP patients, no APC mutation was found, suggesting that mutations in APC coding regions are not the sole cause of FAP or CHRPE. A total of 64 CHRPE lesions were found in FAP patients and some relatives with and without APC mutations. Contrary to most reports, APC mutations before exon 9 did cause CHRPE lesions, albeit relatively few.

27838800
Double germline mutations in APC and BRCA2 in an individual with a pancreatic tumor
We report on three brothers affected by pancreatic tumors, all due to different causes, including mutations associated with two different cancer predisposition syndromes in the same individual. In the index patient a germline mutation both in the APC and BRCA2 gene was identified while one affected brother showed the BRCA2 mutation only and another brother is supposed to have developed pancreatic cancer due to multiple non-genetic risk factors. We outline the impact of a double germline mutation in two tumor predisposition genes in one individual and proven heterogeneity of multiple cases of pancreatic tumors in one family. With the growing implementation of next generation sequence based panel testing for multiple genes involved in tumor predisposition syndromes, relevant variants in two (or more) genes will be found more frequently. This family illustrates the importance of family studies, especially when using gene panel tests.

27692552
[Desmoid tumors in an adolescent girl with familial adenomatous polyposis]
Desmoid tumors (DT) are rare and nonmetastasizing fibroblastic neoplasms, characterized by local invasiveness. They occur sporadically or arise in the context of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; 5-10% of cases). Most cases develop sporadically in young adults, but some cases also occur in children. We report the case of an adolescent girl with FAP and DT, and we discuss the therapeutic strategies. An adolescent girl with FAP underwent surgery at the age of 14 years with total proctocolectomy. She had a neo-mutation in the APC gene at codon 1068, which is not usually associated with DT. Three years later, she had painful defecations. Imaging showed two abdominal DT. After a multidisciplinary team meeting, the patient was refused for surgery, and medical treatment with antihormonal agents and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs was started. Imaging 18 months later showed DT stabilization, but the patient had difficulties to control chronic pains, which required morphine treatment, hypnotic sessions, and transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation. This case highlights the importance of DT screening in patients with FAP, mainly after surgery, regardless of their age and genetic mutation. Progress remains to be made in determining DT risk factors and in developing treatment. DT are still difficult to cure because of their potential for local invasion and local recurrence, and need to be managed by a multidisciplinary team.

8664905
Identification of a novel single base insertion in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene


8608492
Cranial desmoid tumor associated with homozygous inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in a 2-year-old girl with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by the presence of more than 100 adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum starting in the second decade of life. FAP is associated with extra colonic manifestations, including desmoid tumors.

9494520
Novel mutations in the APC gene and clinical features in Swedish patients with polyposis coli
The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene was investigated in Swedish patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). A combination of analyses including single stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP), heteroduplex (HD), protein truncation test (PTT) and direct sequencing was used to enable optimal mutation detection. Three novel mutations in the gene were identified, i.e. nt2644C- > T (giving an Arg876Stop mutation), nt4025del173 (leading to premature truncation of the protein at codon 1337) and nt3526insG (giving truncation at codon 1178). In addition, one previously described mutation, i.e. the 5-bp-deletion nt3942del5(AAAGA) in codon 1309 (giving a premature termination of the protein at codon 1314) was detected. All four mutations were located in the 5'-half of exon 15. The two latter mutations were associated with the CHRPE (congenital hypertrophy of retina pigment epithelium) phenotype (CHRPE was not examined in the other two cases). The patients with mutations in codon 1309 and 1336 had a more severe FAP phenotype.

17506007
A novel frameshift mutation in the APC gene at exon 15 in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) with desmoid tumour


10397462
Mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli and p53 genes in a child with Turcot's syndrome
Turcot's syndrome is a rare heritable complex that is characterized by an association between a primary neuroepithelial tumor of the central nervous system and multiple colonic polyps. The aim of this study was to analyze genetic alterations in a case of Turcot's syndrome in a 10.5-year-old boy in whom a colorectal tumor developed 3.5 years following astrocytoma. An APC germline non-sense mutation at codon 1284 leading to a truncated protein was identified, as was a somatic p53 mutation in the colorectal carcinoma in exon 7, codon 244. The latter was not identified in the primary astrocytoma. However, immunohistochemistry revealed high p53 protein expression in both tumors, suggesting an additional p53 mutation in the primary astrocytic tumor. The diverse p53 mutations observed in this unique syndrome in two different sites and stages of the disease may shed light on the multistep progression of the malignant events.

30523670
Targeted next-generation sequencing approach for molecular genetic diagnosis of hereditary colorectal cancer: Identification of a novel single nucleotide germline insertion in adenomatous polyposis coli gene causes familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease which primarily manifested with developing adenomas or polyps in colon or rectum. It is caused by the germline mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Patients with FAP are usually manifested with "hundreds or even thousands" adenomas or polyps in colon or rectum. However, without proper clinical diagnosis and timely surgical interventions, colorectal adenomas, or polyps gradually increase in size and in numbers which finally leads to colorectal cancer (CRC) at the mean age of 36 years of the patient.

23460355
Clinical characterization and mutation spectrum in Hispanic families with adenomatous polyposis syndromes
Several genetically defined hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC) syndromes are associated with colonic polyposis including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and MUTYH adenomatous polyposis (MAP). Limited data exists on the clinical characterization and genotypic spectrum of polyposis syndromes among Hispanics. To describe the phenotype and genotype of Puerto Rican Hispanic patients with FAP and MUTYH and compare with other ethnic and racial groups. Probands were identified from the Puerto Rico Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry (PURIFICAR). Recruited individuals completed risk factors, medical, and family history questionnaires and underwent genetic testing for genotype analysis. Frequency analysis, Chi square, Fisher's exact and Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used for statistical analysis methods. A total of 31 FAP (from 19 families) and 13 MAP (from 13 families) Hispanic patients recruited from the PURIFICAR were evaluated. Among the FAP cases, mean age at diagnosis was 27.6 (range 9-71 years); 67.7 % cases had more than 100 polyps and 41.9 % had upper gastrointestinal polyps. Among the 19 FAP families, there were 77 affected FAP individuals and 26 colorectal cancer cases. Genetic mutations were available for 42.2 % of FAP families; all mutations identified were unique. Surgeries were reported in 31 cases; 14 (45.2 %) prophylactic surgeries and 6 (19.4 %) therapeutic surgeries for management of CRC. Among MAP cases, mean age at diagnosis was 53 (range 34-76 years). Genetic analysis revealed homozygous biallelic mutations (G382D) in 53.8 %, compound heterozygous mutations (G382/Y165C) in 23 %, and non-G382/Y165C monoallelic mutations in 23 %. Familial cancer registries should be promoted as vehicles for detection, education and follow up of families at-risk of acquiring familial cancers. PURIFICAR is the first and only familial cancer registry in Puerto Rico providing these services to families affected with familial cancer syndromes promoting education, testing and surveillance of at-risk family members, and focusing on cancer prevention efforts. The fact that only 40 % of FAP patients had access to genetic testing stresses the need to promote the establishment of policies supporting genetic testing coverage by medical insurance companies in order to provide patients with the highest standard of care to prevent cancer. Furthermore, our results suggest that Hispanics may have uncommon mutations in adenomatous polyposis related genes, which emphasize the need for full gene sequencing to establish genetic diagnosis.

10454823
The relationship between congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene


11852337
Progressive duodenal adenomatosis in a familial adenomatous polyposis pedigree with APC mutation at codon 1556
Purpose:
        
      
      In familial adenomatous polyposis, genotype-duodenal phenotype correlations have not been clearly understood. We identified the adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutation in a family pedigree with severe duodenal adenomatosis.

8940264
Hereditary desmoid disease due to a frameshift mutation at codon 1924 of the APC gene
Desmoid tumors are slowly growing fibrous tumors highly resistant to therapy and often fatal. Here, we report hereditary desmoid disease (HDD), a novel autosomal dominant trait with 100% penetrance affecting a three-generation kindred. Desmoid tumors are usually a complication of familial adenomatous polyposis, a predisposition to the early development of premalignant adenomatous polyps in the colorectum due to chain-terminating mutations of the APC gene. In general, one or more members in approximately 10% of the FAP families manifest desmoid tumors. Affected individuals from the HDD kindred are characterized by multifocal fibromatosis of the paraspinal muscles, breast, occiput, arms, lower ribs, abdominal wall, and mesentery. Osteomas, epidermal cysts, and other congenital features were also observed. We show that HDD segregates with an unusual germ-line chain-terminating mutation at the 3' end of the APC gene (codon 1924) with somatic loss of the wild-type allele leading to tumor development.

31712236
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) in a patient associated with a novel mutation in APC
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome associated with mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a tumour suppressor located on chromosome 5q21. Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) is a variant associated with fewer and later onset of colon polyps. AFAP-associated APC mutations have largely been found before codon 157, in exon 9 or after codon 1595. We present the case of a 44-year-old man incidentally found to have numerous gastric polyps during bariatric surgery, with innumerable polyps in the remaining part of the stomach and the entire colon, with rectal sparing, consistent with AFAP phenotype. Genetic testing demonstrated the c.7682dup (p.Ser2562Lysfs*21) variant in exon 15 of APC. This represents a previously undescribed APC mutation. This mutation likely yields end-binding protein 1 and human disc large binding protein inactivation, causing cell cycle microtubule dysregulation and tumour suppressor inactivation. Through loss of these regulatory mechanisms, this mutation is associated with AFAP phenotype. The patient was treated surgically and is doing well.

24169521
A novel indel in exon 9 of APC upregulates a 'skip exon 9' isoform and causes very severe familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene causes the majority (80%) of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited form of colorectal cancer (CRC). Mutation in 5'end of exon 9 of APC usually results in an attenuated form of FAP (aFAP), characterized by later age of onset and fewer polyps. The presence of exon 9a, an in-frame isoform with exon 8 spliced to 3'end of exon 9, modulates any deleterious effect of the mutation. A third lowly expressed isoform that completely skips exon 9 is present in both healthy individuals and FAP patients. We report here an interesting case of a proband with an APC mutation in 5'end of exon 9 that presented with six synchronous advanced CRCs at age 37. The novel insertion-deletion (indel) at codon 409, c.1226-1229delTTTTinsAAA, caused upregulation of the 'skip exon 9' isoform, r934-1312del, resulting in a premature stop codon at exon 10 and a truncated protein that removed all of the β-catenin (CTNNB1) binding motifs, thus activating the downstream T-cell transcription factor (Tcf) pathway. Exon 9a isoform was concomitantly downregulated. This finding emphasizes the necessity of examining the various isoforms of exon 9 to avoid clinical mismanagement and counseling based on just the mutation site by genomic DNA sequencing alone.

16264375
Hereditary familial polyposis and Gardner's syndrome: contribution of the odonto-stomatology examination in its diagnosis and a case description
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) and its phenotype variant, Gardner's syndrome, constitute a rare autosomal dominant inherited disorder. They are characterised by the development, generally during the second and third decades of life, of multiple adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum. These polyps have a high risk of subsequently becoming malignant, which normally occurs in the third and fourth decades of life. The phenotypical features of FAP can be very variable. As well as colorectal polyps, these individuals can present with extra-colonic symptoms, among which are particularly: gastro-duodenal polyps, dermoid and epidermoid cysts, desmoid tumours, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, disorders of the maxillary and skeletal bones and dental anomalies. In this paper the most important aspects of this syndrome are reviewed, showing an example based on a well documented clinical case. The importance of odonto-stomatological examinations should be pointed out, among others, as a means of reaching a presumptive diagnosis, whose confirmation is vital to the patient.

21488302
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: APC. Disease: adenomatous polyposis coli


23423322
A Novel Germline Mutation in Exon 15 of the APC Gene in Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis: A Report of Two Cases
Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) is a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis with fewer than one hundred colorectal polyps and a later age of onset of the cancer. Here, we report two cases of AFAP within family members. Each patient demonstrated the same novel germ line mutation in exon 15 of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and was successfully managed with sulindac after refusal to perform colectomy: a 23-year-old man with incidentally diagnosed gastric adenoma and fundic gland polyps underwent colonoscopy, and fewer than 100 colorectal polyps were found; a 48-year-old woman who happened to be the mother of the 23-year-old man also showed fewer than 100 colorectal polyps on colonoscopy. Genetic analysis revealed a novel frameshift mutation in exon 15 of the APC gene. The deletion of adenine-guanine with the insertion of thymine in c.3833-3834 resulted in the formation of stop codon 1,287 in both patients. The patients were treated with sulindac due to their refusal to undergo colectomy. The annual follow-up upper endoscopy and colonoscopy in the following 2 years revealed significant regression of the colorectal polyps in both patients.

15179376
Comprehensive genetic and endoscopic evaluation may be necessary to distinguish sporadic versus familial adenomatous polyposis-associated abdominal desmoid tumors
Background:
        
      
      There are limited data regarding how many patients with desmoid tumors actually represent cases with underlying familial adenomatous polyposis.

15643602
Large deletions of the APC gene in 15% of mutation-negative patients with classical polyposis (FAP): a Belgian study
Germline mutations of the APC gene are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Most of the mutations are protein truncating mutations and are spread over the coding region. Rare whole-gene deletions or exonic deletions have been described. From a series of 85 patients clinically diagnosed with FAP or attenuated FAP (AAPC) in our center, 30 (35%) were found to have truncating or missense mutations. We have now screened the remaining 55 patients for exonic deletions or duplications, first by semi-quantitative PCR and later by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Three whole-gene deletions and one exon 14 deletion were found (5% of patients). The whole-gene deletions were confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, and the breakpoints of the exon 14 deletion could be determined using long range PCR. Further characterization of the whole gene deletions was performed using extragenic polymorphic markers and/or semi-quantitative PCR. We could demonstrate that the deletions do not encompass the MCC gene. Interestingly, the phenotype of the deletion patients was not different from that of patients with truncating mutations. The polyp numbers ranged from attenuated to profuse polyposis and the interfamilial variability of disease phenotype was as in other FAP families. In none of the 28 AAPC patients included in this study, was a large deletion found, while 15% of the patients with classical polyposis had a genomic deletion. It corroborates recently published data, suggesting that large deletions may occur with a frequency higher than 10% in mutation-negative patients with a classical polyposis. In this article, we have included an overview of genomic rearrangements in the 5q21 region.

25324480
A large deletion of chromosome 5q22.1-22.2 associated with sparse type of familial adenomatous polyposis: report of a case
The proband was a 32-year-old man with sparse type of familial adenomatous polyposis with fundic gland and duodenal polyps and congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium without osteoma, dental abnormalities and desmoid tumors. Direct DNA sequencing did not detect germline mutations in any APC exon. However, using the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification method, we detected germline deletions of all APC exons. Using dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization, we identified germline deletion of locus 5q22.1-22.2 that includes APC. Analysis of colorectal tumors identified somatic APC mutations in the cluster region in all polyps, but no loss of heterozygosity was detected in any polyp.

22884971
Copy number variation of the APC gene is associated with regulation of bone mineral density
Introduction:
        
      
      Genetic studies of osteoporosis have commonly examined SNPs in candidate genes or whole genome analyses, but insertions and deletions of DNA, collectively called copy number variations (CNVs), also comprise a large amount of the genetic variability between individuals. Previously, SNPs in the APC gene have been strongly associated with femoral neck and lumbar spine volumetric bone mineral density in older men. In addition, familial adenomatous polyposis patients carrying heterozygous mutations in the APC gene have been shown to have significantly higher mean bone mineral density than age- and sex-matched controls suggesting the importance of this gene in regulating bone mineral density. We examined CNV within the APC gene region to test for association with bone mineral density.

24946964
Promoter-specific alterations of APC are a rare cause for mutation-negative familial adenomatous polyposis
n familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), 20% of classical and 70% of attenuated/atypical (AFAP) cases remain mutation-negative after routine testing; yet, allelic expression imbalance may suggest an APC alteration. Our aim was to determine the proportion of families attributable to genetic or epigenetic changes in the APC promoter region. We studied 51 unrelated families/cases (26 with classical FAP and 25 with AFAP) with no point mutations in the exons and exon/intron borders and no rearrangements by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA, P043-B1). Promoter-specific events of APC were addressed by targeted resequencing, MLPA (P043-C1), methylation-specific MLPA, and Sanger sequencing of promoter regions. A novel 132-kb deletion encompassing the APC promoter 1B and upstream sequence occurred in a classical FAP family with allele-specific APC expression. No promoter-specific point mutations or hypermethylation were present in any family. In conclusion, promoter-specific alterations are a rare cause for mutation-negative FAP (1/51, 2%). The frequency and clinical correlations of promoter 1B deletions are poorly defined. This investigation provides frequencies of 1/26 (4%) for classical FAP, 0/25 (0%) for AFAP, and 1/7 (14%) for families with allele-specific expression of APC. Clinically, promoter 1B deletions may associate with classical FAP without extracolonic manifestations.

20033212
Large intron 14 rearrangement in APC results in splice defect and attenuated FAP
Familial adenomatous polyposis [FAP (OMIM 175100)] is an autosomal dominant colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by hundreds to thousands of colonic polyps and, if untreated by a combination of screening and/or surgical intervention, an approximately 99% lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. A subset of FAP patients develop an attenuated form of the condition characterized by lower numbers of colonic polyps (highly variable, but generally less than 100) and a lower lifetime risk of colorectal cancer, on the order of 70%. We report the diagnosis of three attenuated FAP families due to a 1.4-kb deletion within intron 14 of APC, originally reported clinically as a variant of unknown significance (VUS). Sequence analysis suggests that this arose through an Alu-mediated recombination event with a locus on chromosome 6q22.1. This mutation is inherited by family members who presented with an attenuated FAP phenotype, with variable age of onset and severity. Sequence analysis of mRNA revealed an increase in the level of aberrant splicing of exon 14, resulting in the generation of an exon 13-exon 15 splice-form that is predicted to lead to a frameshift and protein truncation at codon 673. The relatively mild phenotypic presentation and the intra-familial variation are consistent with the leaky nature of exon 14 splicing in normal APC. The inferred founder of these three families may account for as yet undetected affected branches of this kindred. This and similar types of intronic mutations may account for a significant proportion of FAP cases where APC clinical analysis fails because of the current limitations of testing options.

19731080
Evaluating Lynch syndrome in very early onset colorectal cancer probands without apparent polyposis
To characterize the frequency of germline mutations associated with Lynch syndrome and review the potential expanded differential diagnoses in very early onset colorectal cancer (CRC) cases without apparent polyposis. Retrospectively reviewed medical records of 96 probands with CRC diagnosed prior to age 36 from three cancer centers. Determined the frequency of germline mutations in probands meeting different clinical criteria used to identify Lynch syndrome. Three of 46 (6.5%) single case indicators (probands without additional personal or family history suspicious for Lynch syndrome) were identified to carry a deleterious or suspected deleterious mismatch repair (MMR) mutation compared with 10 of 19 (52.6%) in the cases meeting at least one additional revised Bethesda guideline, and 11 of 15 (73.3%) in the cases meeting Amsterdam criteria. Two families without MMR mutations were documented to have a germline APC or TP53 mutation after additional clinical features were identified. Our results suggest that single cases of CRC (those without additional personal or family history suspicious of Lynch syndrome) diagnosed prior to age 36 infrequently have identifiable MMR mutations, especially when compared to cases meeting additional criteria. Careful attention to evolving or additional clinical features is warranted and may lead to an alternate genetic diagnosis in families with early onset CRC.

30689869
High-resolution array-CGH analysis on 46,XX patients affected by early onset primary ovarian insufficiency discloses new genes involved in ovarian function
Study question:
        
      
      Can high resolution array-CGH analysis on a cohort of women showing a primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) phenotype in young age identify copy number variants (CNVs) with a deleterious effect on ovarian function?

11409872
Topoisomerase-I- and Alu-mediated genomic deletions of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene results in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a heritable form of colorectal cancer. We have previously reported two novel mutations that delete exons 11 and 14 of the APC gene, respectively, at the cDNA level without any splice junction defects at the genomic level. We describe here the precise breakpoints of the two mutations and the possible mechanisms leading to the genomic rearrangement. The first rearrangement is most likely a topoisomerase-I-mediated non-homologous recombination resulting in a 2-kb deletion that deletes exon 11 of the APC gene. Both 5' and 3' breakpoints have two topoisomerase I recognition sites and runs of pyrimidines within the 10-bp sequences in their vicinity. Further, the 3' breakpoint has an adenine-thymidine-rich region. This is probably the first report of a topoisomerase-I-mediated germline mutation in a tumor suppressor gene. The second rearrangement is most likely an Alu-Alu homologous recombination resulting in a 6-kb deletion encompassing exon 14. The Alu elements at the 5' and 3' breakpoints include the 26-bp core sequence thought to stimulate recombination. In both rearrangements, partial sequences from the long interspersed nuclear element family are in the vicinity of the breakpoints. Other than serving as markers for regions of DNA damage, their precise role in the recombination events, if any, is unclear. Both deletions result in truncated APC proteins missing the beta-catenin- and axin-binding domains, resulting in severe polyposis and cancer.

25159889
APC rearrangements in familial adenomatous polyposis: heterogeneity of deletion lengths and breakpoint sequences underlies similar phenotypes
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited syndrome leading to the development of multiple intestinal polyps and colorectal cancer. FAP is associated with germline defects of APC tumor suppressor gene; although truncating mutations account for the majority of cases, large APC deletions represent a common disease-causing defect. While a number of intragenic deletions have been well-characterized, sequencing data of breakpoints involved in large APC rearrangements are extremely scanty. We characterized six deletions identified by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (three intragenic and three larger deletions encompassing the APC locus): in each case, we precisely mapped the breakpoints by array-comparative genomic hybridization and/or long-range PCR followed by sequencing. All rearrangements were novel and no rearrangements proved to be recurrent or clustered. The three intragenic deletions involved exons 4, 9 and 14, respectively; larger deletions (30,444, 265,471 and 921,295 bp in length) involved APC as well as adjacent genes. Nine out of 12 breakpoints fell within repetitive elements (5 Alu, 2 LINE, 1 Tigger and 1 MIR), while the remaining 3 fell within unique sequences. In five out of six patients, non-allelic homologous recombination or non-homologous end joining appear as the most likely mechanisms behind APC rearrangements. Although a certain variability of clinical features was detectable both between and within families with deletions, all deletion carriers were classifiable as FAP patients showing colonic and extracolonic manifestations that belong to the spectrum of the syndrome. Therefore, different sized deletions, variable breakpoint localizations and haploinsufficiency for other genes besides APC, resulted in the same FAP clinical phenotype.

26311738
A novel pathogenic germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene in a Chinese family with familial adenomatous coli
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disease manifesting as colorectal cancer in middle-aged patients. Mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene contribute to both FAP and sporadic or familial colorectal carcinogenesis. Here we describe the identification of the causative APC gene defects associated with FAP in a Chinese pedigree. All patients with FAP were diagnosed by their combination of clinical features, family history, colonoscopy, and pathology examinations. Blood samples were collected and genomic DNA was extracted. Mutation analysis of APC was conducted by targeted next-generation sequencing, long-range PCR and Sanger sequencing. A novel mutation in exon 14-15(c.1936-2148 del) and intron 14 of the APC gene was demonstrated in all FAP patients and was absent in unaffected family members. This novel deletion causing FAP in Chinese kindred expands the germline mutation spectrum of the APC gene in the Chinese population.

23725351
APC promoter 1B deletion in familial polyposis--implications for mutation-negative families
Over 1500 adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations have already been identified as causative of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, routine genetic testing fails to detect mutations in about 10% of classic FAP cases. Recently, it has been shown that a proportion of mutation-negative FAP cases bear molecular changes in deep intronic and regulatory sequences. In this study, we used direct sequencing, followed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) of genomic DNA from family members, affected by classic FAP. We first reported the family as mutation negative. With the launch of a new version of MLPA kit, we retested the family and a novel full deletion of promoter 1B was detected. The exact breakpoints of the deletion were determined by array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and long range polymerase chain reaction (PCR), followed by direct sequencing. The total APC expression levels were investigated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay and allele-specific expression (ASE) analysis. The APC gene expression was highly reduced, which indicates causative relationship. We suggest that there is a significant possibility that APC promoter 1B mutations could be found in mutation-negative FAP patients. In the light of our findings it seems reasonable to consider targeted genetic re-analysis of APC promoter 1B region in a larger cohort of unsolved cases.

1678319
Identification of deletion mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis locus
Small (100-260 kb), nested deletions were characterized in DNA from two unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). Three candidate genes located within the deleted region were ascertained and a previous candidate gene, MCC, was shown to be located outside the deleted region. One of the new genes contained sequence identical to SRP19, the gene coding for the 19 kd component of the ribosomal signal recognition particle. The second, provisionally designated DP1 (deleted in polyposis 1), was found to be transcribed in the same orientation as MCC. Two other cDNAs, DP2 and DP3, were found to overlap, forming a single gene, DP2.5, that is transcribed in the same orientation as SRP19.

16820884
Detection of APC gene deletion by double competitive polymerase chain reaction in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant familial cancer syndrome caused by germline mutations of the tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Heterozygous apc mutations have been identified in the majority of classical FAP patients who develop more than 100 colorectal adenomas. However, classical FAP patients often fail to display germline APC mutations detectable by routine mutation analysis. These apparently mutation-negative cases may be caused by heterozygous large genomic deletions. In the present study, FAP patients who showed no APC germline mutation detectable by the protein truncation assay and direct sequencing of protein coding exons were screened for APC gene deletion by a gene dose assay based on double competitive polymerase chain reaction. Gene dosage measurements within exon 15 of the APC gene identified two patients with gene deletion and one with possible gene duplication among 41 apparently mutation-negative patients. The deleted sequences in the two patients were determined by fine gene dose mapping around the APC gene and nucleotide sequencing of the deletion breakpoints. They were approximately 435-kilobase pair (kb) and 737-kb regions including the whole APC gene and flanked by a 4-base pair repeat and LINE-1 repetitive sequences, respectively. The chimeric LINE-1 element created at the breakpoint in the latter case also contained a short sequence derived from another LINE-1 element, suggesting a complex unequal homologous recombination event. These findings indicate that this gene dose assay is a useful technique to detect large gene deletions of the APC gene and to determine their genomic breakpoints.

15727247
Identification of genomic deletions of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis by two independent quantitative techniques
Large deletions in the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene, causing familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), cannot easily be detected by conventional mutation-detection techniques. Therefore, we have developed two independent quantitative methods for the detection of large deletions, encompassing one or more exons, of APC. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is performed in one reaction for the initial quantification of all APC exon copy numbers. Subsequently, quantitative real-time PCR (QRT-PCR) is used to verify the results obtained in the MLPA reaction. The identification of a deletion of the whole APC gene in a patient with classical FAP is described. The mutation was detected with the two quantitative methods and further verified on chromosomal level by the use of FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) on metaphase spreads. Furthermore, a large deletion covering exons 11-13 of the APC gene was detected in two apparently unrelated families. This deletion was further verified and characterized with long-range PCR. The MLPA test ensures a sensitive high-throughput screening for large deletions of the APC gene and can easily be implemented in the diagnostic testing for FAP.

28818680
Clinical Validation of Copy Number Variant Detection from Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing Panels
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has rapidly replaced Sanger sequencing in the assessment of sequence variations in clinical genetics laboratories. One major limitation of current NGS approaches is the ability to detect copy number variations (CNVs) approximately >50 bp. Because these represent a major mutational burden in many genetic disorders, parallel CNV assessment using alternate supplemental methods, along with the NGS analysis, is normally required, resulting in increased labor, costs, and turnaround times. The objective of this study was to clinically validate a novel CNV detection algorithm using targeted clinical NGS gene panel data. We have applied this approach in a retrospective cohort of 391 samples and a prospective cohort of 2375 samples and found a 100% sensitivity (95% CI, 89%-100%) for 37 unique events and a high degree of specificity to detect CNVs across nine distinct targeted NGS gene panels. This NGS CNV pipeline enables stand-alone first-tier assessment for CNV and sequence variants in a clinical laboratory setting, dispensing with the need for parallel CNV analysis using classic techniques, such as microarray, long-range PCR, or multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. This NGS CNV pipeline can also be applied to the assessment of complex genomic regions, including pseudogenic DNA sequences, such as the PMS2CL gene, and to mitochondrial genome heteroplasmy detection.

12136240
Different familial adenomatous polyposis phenotypes resulting from deletions of the entire APC exon 15
Germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC) gene cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal, dominantly inherited disease that predisposes patients to colorectal cancer. The APC gene is composed of 15 coding exons and encodes an open reading frame of 8.5 kb. The 3' 6.5 kb of the APCopen reading frame is encoded by a single exon, exon 15. Most identified APC mutations are at the 5' half of the APC open reading frame and are nucleotide substitutions and small deletions or insertions that result in truncation of the APC protein. Very few well-characterized gross alterations of APC have been reported. Patients with FAP typically develop hundreds to thousands of colorectal tumors beginning in their adolescence. A subgroup of patients with FAP who develop fewer tumors at an older age have what is called attenuated FAP (AFAP). Accumulating evidence indicates that patients carrying germline APC mutations in the first four coding exons, in the alternatively spliced region of exon 9, or in the 3' half of the coding region usually develop AFAP. We characterized two germline APC alterations that deleted the entire APC exon 15 as the result of 56-kb and 73-kb deletions at the APC locus. A surprising finding was that one proband had the typical FAP phenotype, whereas the other had a phenotype consistent with that of AFAP.

28791770
A novel APC promoter 1B deletion shows a founder effect in Italian patients with classical familial adenomatous polyposis phenotype
Familial adenomatous polyposis is a Mendelian syndrome in which germline loss-of-function mutations of APC are associated with multiple adenomatous polyps of the large bowel, a multiplicity of extracolonic features, and a high lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. Different APC germline mutations have been identified, including sequence changes, genomic rearrangements, and expression defects. Recently, very rare families have been associated with constitutive large deletions encompassing the APC-5' regulatory region, while leaving the remaining gene sequence intact; the regulatory region contains a proximal and a distal promoter, called 1A and 1B, respectively. We identified a novel deletion encompassing promoter 1B in a large Italian family that manifested polyposis in three of the six branches descending from a founding couple married in 1797. By combining different molecular approaches on both DNA and RNA, we precisely mapped this deletion (6858 bp in length) that proved to be associated with APC allele silencing. The finding of the same deletion in two additional polyposis families pointed to a founder mutation in Italy. Deletion carriers from the three families all showed a "classical" polyposis phenotype. To explore the molecular mechanisms underlying promoter deletions, we performed an in silico analysis of the breakpoints of 1A and 1B rearrangements so far reported in the literature; moreover, to decipher genotype-phenotype correlations, we critically reviewed current knowledge on deletions versus point mutations in the APC-5' regulatory region.

18487285
Detection of APC gene deletions using quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments
Background:
        
      
      approximately 20% of classic familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) cases and 70% to 80% of attenuated FAP (AFAP) cases are negative for the APC/MUTYH point mutation. Quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF), a technique for detecting copy number alterations, has been successfully applied to several cancer syndrome genes. We used QMPSF for the APC gene to screen FAP APC/MUTYH mutation-negative families to improve their diagnostic surveillance.

27217144
Reduced expression of APC-1B but not APC-1A by the deletion of promoter 1B is responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene APC are associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Here we applied whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to the DNA of a sporadic FAP patient in which we did not find any pathological APC mutations by direct sequencing. WGS identified a promoter deletion of approximately 10 kb encompassing promoter 1B and exon1B of APC. Additional allele-specific expression analysis by deep cDNA sequencing revealed that the deletion reduced the expression of the mutated APC allele to as low as 11.2% in the total APC transcripts, suggesting that the residual mutant transcripts were driven by other promoter(s). Furthermore, cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE) demonstrated that the deleted promoter 1B region is responsible for the great majority of APC transcription in many tissues except the brain. The deletion decreased the transcripts of APC-1B to 39-45% in the patient compared to the healthy controls, but it did not decrease those of APC-1A. Different deletions including promoter 1B have been reported in FAP patients. Taken together, our results strengthen the evidence that analysis of structural variations in promoter 1B should be considered for the FAP patients whose pathological mutations are not identified by conventional direct sequencing.

10482959
Three submicroscopic deletions at the APC locus and their rapid detection by quantitative-PCR analysis
We describe three unrelated kindreds, affected by familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), with 5q submicroscopic deletions that encompass the entire adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and the adjacent DP1 gene. In one family the deletion encompasses also the MCC (mutated in colon cancer) gene. Affected members of these families had dysplastic adenomatous polyps and congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE); no individual was affected by mental retardation or facial dysmorphism. The deletions were detected by linkage analysis with several intragenic and closely flanking polymorphic markers and confirmed by a quantitative PCR analysis. This procedure could have an impact on the detection of the molecular defect in FAP patients in whom mutational analysis fails to identify the specific mutation.

17568392
Genotype-phenotype correlations in 19 Dutch cases with APC gene deletions and a literature review
Partial and whole gene deletions represent a large proportion (4-33%) of the APC mutations found in polyposis patients, who previously had negative test results. The genotype-phenotype correlations for these APC deletions have not been studied in detail. We aimed to assess the number of germ line APC deletions in Dutch polyposis patients, to describe the clinical phenotype(s), and to review the current literature. We screened 296 index patients with polyposis, who previously had negative test results for APC or MUTYH mutations, for germ line APC gene deletions using Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification. APC deletions were identified in 19 polyposis patients; seven had a whole gene deletion, nine had a deletion involving two or more exons, and three had single exon deletions. Most of the deletion families (83%) displayed a classic familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) phenotype (100-2000 adenomas). We saw no patients with APC deletions and a severe phenotype (ie >2000 polyps); on the contrary, two families carrying a deletion of exons 7-13 and one family with a deletion of exons 1-5 showed a distinctly attenuated FAP phenotype. APC deletions were found in a considerable proportion of polyposis patients previously tested negative for APC or MUTYH (6%, 19/296) and represent 8% of all APC mutations found at our clinics (19/242). Methods to identify such deletions should therefore be included in routine germ line APC mutation analysis. While most total and partial APC deletions lead to a classic FAP phenotype, specific (in-frame) deletions may lead to an attenuated polyposis phenotype.

16736293
A novel exon duplication event leading to a truncating germ-line mutation of the APC gene in a familial adenomatous polyposis family
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant condition predisposing to multiple adenomatous polyps of the colon. FAP patients frequently carry heterozygous mutations of the APC tumour suppressor gene. Affected individuals from a cohort of FAP families (n=22), where no germ-line APC mutation was detected by direct sequencing, were analysed by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). MLPA identified a previously unreported APC mutation involving duplication of exon 4. Subsequent analysis of cDNA from affected family members revealed expression of mutant mRNA species containing two copies of exon 4, resulting in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Bioinformatic analysis of the relevant APC genomic segment predicted a role for homologous recombination possibly involving Alu repeats in the generation of this genotype. Our results highlight the importance of MLPA as an adjunct to exon-by-exon sequencing in identifying infrequent mutational events in cancer predisposing genes.

11288716
Submicroscopic deletions of the APC gene: a frequent cause of familial adenomatous polyposis that may be overlooked by conventional mutation scanning


30259713
A novel large germ line deletion in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene associated with familial adenomatous polyposis
Background:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a familial colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by the development of numerous colorectal polyps, which is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. FAP is caused by germ line mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Here, we described the identification of a causative APC gene deletion associated with FAP in an Iranian family.

15475941
Dosage analysis of cancer predisposition genes by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is a recently described method for detecting gross deletions or duplications of DNA sequences, aberrations which are commonly overlooked by standard diagnostic analysis. To determine the incidence of copy number variants in cancer predisposition genes from families in the Wessex region, we have analysed the hMLH1 and hMSH2 genes in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), BRCA1 and BRCA2 in families with hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (BRCA) and APC in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP). Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (n=162) and FAP (n=74) probands were fully screened for small mutations, and cases for which no causative abnormality were found (HNPCC, n=122; FAP, n=24) were screened by MLPA. Complete or partial gene deletions were identified in seven cases for hMSH2 (5.7% of mutation-negative HNPCC; 4.3% of all HNPCC), no cases for hMLH1 and six cases for APC (25% of mutation negative FAP; 8% of all FAP). For BRCA1 and BRCA2, a partial mutation screen was performed and 136 mutation-negative cases were selected for MLPA. Five deletions and one duplication were found for BRCA1 (4.4% of mutation-negative BRCA cases) and one deletion for BRCA2 (0.7% of mutation-negative BRCA cases). Cost analysis indicates it is marginally more cost effective to perform MLPA prior to point mutation screening, but the main advantage gained by prescreening is a greatly reduced reporting time for the patients who are positive. These data demonstrate that dosage analysis is an essential component of genetic screening for cancer predisposition genes.

27391059
A novel pathogenic large germline deletion in adenomatous polyposis coli gene in a Chinese family with familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations of the APC gene are associated with an autosomal dominant precancerous condition, termed familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is clinically manifested by the presence of multiple colorectal adenomas or polyps. Gradually, these colorectal adenomas or polyps inevitably result in colorectal cancer by the third-to fourth decade of life. Surgical interventions or total proctocolectomy is the best possible treatment for FAP. Here, we present a clinical molecular study of a five generation Chinese family with FAP. Diagnosis of FAP was made on the basis of clinical manifestations, family history and medical (colonoscopy and histopathology) records. Blood samples were collected and genomic DNA was extracted. Genetic screening of the APC gene was performed by targeted next-generation sequencing and quantitative real-time PCR. Targeted next generation sequencing identified a novel heterozygous large deletion [exon5-exon16; c.423_8532del] of APC gene, which segregated with the FAP phenotypes in the proband and in all the affected family members. Unaffected family members and normal controls did not carry this deletion. In the Chinese population, most of the previously reported APC gene mutations are missense mutations. This is the first report describing the largest deletion of the APC gene in the Chinese population associated with FAP.

25210923
The association between DNA copy number aberrations at chromosome 5q22 and gastric cancer
Background:
        
      
      Gastric cancer is common cancer. Discovering novel genetic biomarkers might help to identify high-risk individuals. Copy number variation (CNV) has recently been shown to influence risk for several cancers. The aim of the present study was sought to test the association between copy number at a variant region and GC.

11867715
Whole-gene APC deletions cause classical familial adenomatous polyposis, but not attenuated polyposis or "multiple" colorectal adenomas
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited colorectal tumor predisposition that results from germ-line mutations in the APC gene (chromosome 5q21). FAP shows substantial phenotypic variability: classical polyposis patients develop more than 100 colorectal adenomas, whereas those with attenuated polyposis (AAPC) have fewer than 100 adenomas. A further group of individuals, so-called "multiple" adenoma patients, have a phenotype like AAPC, with 3-99 polyps throughout the colorectum, but mostly have no demonstrable germ-line APC mutation. Routine mutation detection techniques fail to detect a pathogenic APC germ-line mutation in approximately 30% of patients with classical polyposis and 90% of those with AAPC/multiple adenomas. We have developed a real-time quantitative multiplex PCR assay to detect APC exon 14 deletions. When this technique was applied to a set of 60 classical polyposis and 143 AAPC/multiple adenoma patients with no apparent APC germ-line mutation, deletions were found exclusively in individuals with classical polyposis (7 of 60, 12%). Fine-mapping of the region suggested that the majority (6 of 7) of these deletions encompassed the entire APC locus, confirming that haploinsufficiency can result in a classical polyposis phenotype. Screening for germ-line deletions in APC mutation-negative individuals with classical polyposis seems warranted.

15689459
Large submicroscopic genomic APC deletions are a common cause of typical familial adenomatous polyposis


25243319
APC promoter 1B deletion in seven American families with familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Clinical genetic testing fails to identify disease causing mutations in up to 20% of clinically apparent FAP cases. Following the inclusion of multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probes specific for APC promoter 1B, seven probands were identified with a deletion of promoter 1B. Using haplotype analysis spanning the APC locus, the seven families appear to be identical by descent from a common founder. The clinical phenotype of 19 mutation carriers is classical FAP with colectomy at an average age of 24. The majority of cases had a large number of duodenal and gastric polyps. Measurements of allele-specific expression of APC mRNA using TaqMan assay confirmed that relative expression in the allele containing the promoter 1B deletion was reduced 42-98%, depending on tissue type. This study confirms the importance of APC promoter deletions as a cause of FAP and identifies a founder mutation in FAP patients from the United States.

26213617
Characterization of an APC Promoter 1B deletion in a Patient Diagnosed with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis via Whole Genome Shotgun Sequencing
Recently, deletions have been identified and published as causal for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis in the 1B promoter region of the APC gene. Those deletions were measured using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Here, we present and characterize an ~11kb deletion identified by whole genome shotgun sequencing. The deletion occurred in a patient diagnosed with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis, and was located on chr5, between bases 112,034,824 and 112,045,845, fully encompassing the 1B promoter region of the APC gene. Results are presented here that include the sequence evidence supporting the presence of the deletion as well as base level characterization of the deletion site. These results demonstrate the capacity of whole genome sequencing for the detection of large structural variants in single individuals.

25941542
Novel APC promoter and exon 1B deletion and allelic silencing in three mutation-negative classic familial adenomatous polyposis families
Background:
        
      
      The overwhelming majority (approximately 80%) of individuals with classic familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) exhibit mutations in the coding sequence of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. Families without detectable APC mutations are unable to benefit from the use of genetic testing for clinical management of this autosomal dominant syndrome.

18982352
A large novel deletion in the APC promoter region causes gene silencing and leads to classical familial adenomatous polyposis in a Manitoba Mennonite kindred
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome caused by the inheritance of germline mutations in the APC tumour suppressor gene. The vast majority of these are nonsense and frameshift mutations resulting in a truncated protein product and abnormal function. While APC promoter hypermethylation has been previously documented, promoter-specific deletion mutations have not been reported. In a large Canadian Mennonite polyposis kindred, we identified a large novel germline deletion in the APC promoter region by linkage analysis and MLPA. By RT-PCR and sequence analysis, this mutation was found to result in transcriptional silencing of the APC allele. A few genetic disorders have been characterized as over-represented in the Manitoba Mennonite population, however, the incidence of cancer has not been recognized as increased in this population as compared to other Manitoba ethnic groups. This study strengthens the likelihood that this novel APC promoter mutation is linked to this unique population as a founder mutation.

10077730
Hereditary desmoid disease in a family with a germline Alu I repeat mutation of the APC gene
Two families with autosomal dominantly inherited desmoid tumors have recently been shown to have germline mutations at the 3' end of the APC gene. We subsequently identified an Amish family with autosomal dominantly inherited desmoid tumors. Genetic analysis performed on one family member, a 47-year-old man with multiple desmoid tumors and no colon polyps, revealed a protein truncating mutation in the middle of the APC gene. The truncating mutation is the result of a 337-bp insertion of an Alu I sequence into codon 1526 of the APC gene. The presence of a poly(A) tail at the 3' end of the insertion suggests that the Alu I sequence was inserted by a retrotranspositional event. Germline insertions of Alu I sequences have occasionally been reported to cause other genetic diseases including type I neurofibromatosis, hereditary site-specific breast cancer (BRCA2), and hemophilia B. However, this is the first report of a germline mutation of the APC gene resulting from an Alu I insertion.

17598199
Gene symbol: APC


31552105
Association of Rare Recurrent Copy Number Variants With Congenital Heart Defects Based on Next-Generation Sequencing Data From Family Trios
Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are a common birth defect, affecting approximately 1% of newborn children in the United States. As previously reported, a significant number of CHDs are potentially attributed to altered copy number variants (CNVs). However, as many genomic variants are rare, a large-scale CNV triad study is necessary to characterize the genetic architecture of CHD. We used whole-exome sequencing (WES) data generated by the Pediatric Cardiac Genomics Consortium (PCGC), including a discovery dataset of 2,103 individuals from 760 nuclear family trios and an independent replication set of 4,808 individuals from 1,712 trios. The candidate targets uncovered were further validated through different platforms, including the Omni single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array chip in 1,860 individuals and the whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data in 33 trios. The genes harboring CNVs of interest were then investigated for expression alternations based on cardiac tissue RNA-Seq data. We identified multiple CNVs in the WES data that associated with specific sub-phenotypes of CHD in approximately 2,400 families, including 98 de novo CNV regions. We identified five CNV loci harboring LIMS1, GCC2, RANBP2, TTC3, and MAP3K7CL, respectively, where those genes are highly expressed in human heart and/or mouse embryo heart at 15 days. Five novel CNV loci were uncovered, demonstrating altered expression of the respective candidate genes involved. To our knowledge, this is the largest trio-based WES study of CHD and, in addition to uncovering novel CHD targets, presents an extensive resource with the potential to provide important insights to the architecture and impact of CNVs in CHD.

18406876
Identification of a novel duplication in the APC gene using multiple ligation probe amplification in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis
Germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene cause familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominant disease characterized by hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum, with progression to colorectal cancer. The majority of APC mutations are nucleotide substitutions and frameshift mutations that result in truncated proteins. Recently, large genomic alterations of the APC gene have been reported in FAP. DNA from 15 FAP patients, in whom no APC germline mutations were detected with denaturing high performance liquid chromatography, was analyzed with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to evaluate gross genomic alterations in the APC gene. In one case, MLPA identified a novel duplication of exons 2-6 in one copy of the APC gene. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction revealed that the mutant allele contained an in-frame multiexon duplication including 18 nucleotides located in exon 2, upstream of the ATG initiation codon. The presence of a premature stop codon in the duplicated sequence leads to the synthesis of a truncated APC polypeptide. These findings highlight the utility of evaluating infrequent APC mutation events in FAP patients using MLPA.

33807868
Whole-Genome Sequencing in Diagnostics of Selected Slovenian Undiagnosed Patients with Rare Disorders
Several patients with rare genetic disorders remain undiagnosed following comprehensive diagnostic testing using whole-exome sequencing (WES). In these patients, pathogenic genetic variants may reside in intronic or regulatory regions or they may emerge through mutational mechanisms not detected by WES. For this reason, we implemented whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in routine clinical diagnostics of patients with undiagnosed genetic disorders and report on the outcome in 30 patients. Criteria for consideration included (1) negative WES, (2) a high likelihood of a genetic cause for the disorders, (3) positive family history, (4) detection of large blocks of homozygosity or (5) detection of a single pathogenic variant in a gene associated with recessive conditions. We successfully discovered a causative genetic variant in 6 cases, a retrotranspositional event in the APC gene, non-coding variants in the intronic region of the OTC gene and the promotor region of the UFM1 gene, repeat expansion in the RFC1 gene and a single exon duplication in the CNGB3 gene. We also discovered one coding variant, an indel, which was missed by variant caller during WES data analysis. Our study demonstrates the impact of WGS in the group of patients with undiagnosed genetic diseases after WES in the clinical setting and the diversity of mutational mechanisms discovered, which would remain undetected using other methods.

24675673
Deep sequencing with intronic capture enables identification of an APC exon 10 inversion in a patient with polyposis
Purpose:
        
      
      Single-exon inversions have rarely been described in clinical syndromes and are challenging to detect using Sanger sequencing. We report the case of a 40-year-old woman with adenomatous colon polyps too numerous to count and who had a complex inversion spanning the entire exon 10 in APC (the gene encoding for adenomatous polyposis coli), causing exon skipping and resulting in a frameshift and premature protein truncation.

21488240
Novel human pathological mutations. Gene symbol: APC. Disease: adenomatous polyposis coli


33670908
Identification of a Novel Pathogenic Rearrangement Variant of the APC Gene Associated with a Variable Spectrum of Familial Cancer
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by the presence of multiple colorectal adenomas, caused by germline variants in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. More than 300 germline variants have been characterized. The detection of novel variants is important to understand the mechanisms of pathophysiology. We identified a novel pathogenic germline variant using next-generation sequencing (NGS) in a proband patient. The variant is a complex rearrangement (c.422+1123_532-577 del ins 423-1933_423-1687 inv) that generates a complete deletion of exon 5 of the APC gene. To study the variant in other family members, we designed an endpoint PCR method followed by Sanger sequencing. The variant was identified in the proband patient's mother, one daughter, her brother, two cousins, a niece, and a second nephew. In patients where the variant was identified, we found atypical clinical symptoms, including mandibular, ovarian, breast, pancreatic, and gastric cancer. Genetic counseling and cancer prevention strategies were provided for the family. According to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guidelines, this novel variant is considered a PVS1 variant (very strong evidence of pathogenicity), and it can be useful in association with clinical data for early surveillance and suitable treatment.

9452092
310 basepair APC deletion with duplication of breakpoint (439ins15del310) in an Italian polyposis patient


24770791
An unusual case of familial adenomatous polyposis with very early symptom occurrence
We report the clinical case of a patient who showed an "accelerated" form of polyposis, with development of major lesions within the first decade of life. The patient belongs to a familial adenomatous polyposis family-already described in 2001-featured by profuse polyposis at an early age of onset and desmoid tumors in the majority of affected individuals (of both sexes). The family was characterized by an uncommon mutation of the APC gene (c.4391_4700del310insCACCTACTGCTGAAA, previously defined as c.4394ins15del310) consisting in a large deletion of 310 bp at codon 1,464 with duplication of the breakpoint leading to a stop codon at position 1,575. The proband was affected by desmoids tumors at the age of 3 years. In the same year (2004) numerous polyps in the large bowel and a hepatoblastoma developed. After several months new desmoids appeared in the surgical scar. In 2010, at age 9, the patient was operated of total colectomy and endorectal pull-through of the small intestine owing to profuse colorectal adenomatosis. New desmoids developed in 2011 and 2012, and required chemotherapy. Further analysis of the APC gene in the proband revealed several polymorphisms. One of these (c.398A>G) had not been previously reported, nor was present in two other affected members of the family. The clinical case, and the practical implications for therapy, are discussed according to the most recent theories of colorectal cancer development. Long-term treatment with Cox-2 inhibitors might represent a good option for this patient.

20935450
Gene variants associated to malignant thyroid disease in familial adenomatous polyposis: a novel APC germline mutation
Background and aim:
        
      
      Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal inherited syndrome characterized by hundreds to thousands colorectal adenomatous polyps with oncological transformation lifetime risk of 100%. FAP is mainly associated with mutations in APC (autosomal dominant inheritance) or MUTYH (autosomal recessive inheritance) genes. Affected individuals are at increased risk of developing extra-intestinal tumors. Lifetime risk of developing thyroid carcinoma has been described in previous reports of about 2-12%, mainly in females, and the mean age is below 30 yr. About 95% of cancers are papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), mostly multifocal. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency of PTC among our series of FAP patients and to assess the type of gene mutation associated with the disease.

27170298
Protein-losing enteropathy in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis and advanced colon cancer
A 29-year-old female visited a hospital because of increasingly severe lower leg edema. She was diagnosed as having multiple polyps in the stomach and colon by gastroscopy and sigmoidoscopy as well as multiple liver tumors by abdominal CT. She was referred to our hospital for further examination. Total colonoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor in the transverse colon and more than 200 polyps distributed throughout the colorectum. Biopsies of the tumor and polyps showed histological characteristics of adenocarcinoma and tubulovillous adenoma, respectively. Thus, she was diagnosed as having metastatic colon cancer derived from familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Laboratory tests showed a marked hypoalbuminemia of 1.1 g/dl. The fecal alpha-1 anti-trypsin test showed abnormal clearance (62.1 ml/day), and scintigraphy using 99mTc-human serum albumin revealed protein loss in the whole colon. Multiple ligation probe amplification analysis of the APC gene identified a germline duplication of exons 11-13. Direct sequencing of the reverse transcription PCR products of APC mRNA revealed a deletion of 25 base pairs and a tandem duplication of exons 11-13. This case was considered to be protein-losing enteropathy resulting from numerous colonic tubulovillous adenomas and advanced colon cancer in a FAP patient with unusual mutational events in APC.

17251345
A complex rearrangement in the APC gene uncovered by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene APC are the underlying cause of familial adenomatous polyposis, an autosomal-dominant cancer predisposition syndrome of the colorectum. Here, we describe a complex pathogenic rearrangement in the APC gene that was detected during deletion screening and transmitted throughout at least three generations. The rearrangement consists of a deletion of 604 bp in intron 4 that impairs the binding site of the reverse primer for exon 4 and of an insertion of 119 bp in exon 4 that interferes with the binding site of the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probes for exon 4. The insertion is composed of three duplicated sequences derived from exon 4, intron 3, and intron 4, all in inverse direction. By transcript analysis, we found that the mutation results in complete skipping of exon 4 and that it leads to a frameshift. The rearrangement would not have been identified had it occurred outside the MLPA hybridization site. Our findings demonstrate that part of the pathogenic mutations remain undetected by routine methods. Moreover, MLPA and RNA analysis alone would have led to an incorrect interpretation of a genomic deletion of exon 4.

7669739
Molecular, cytogenetic, and phenotypic studies of a constitutional reciprocal translocation t(5;10)(q22;q25) responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis in a Dutch pedigree
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited predisposition to colorectal cancer caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene located on chromosome segment 5q21-q22. We detected a germline rearrangement of the APC gene in a Dutch FAP family by screening genomic DNA samples with APC cDNA probes. Subsequent molecular and cytogenetic studies revealed a constitutional reciprocal translocation t(5;10)(q22;q25) that resulted in the disruption of the APC gene. Southern blot and polymorphic marker analysis indicated that part of the APC gene had been deleted. Analysis of the APC protein product indicated that the translocation breakpoint did not lead to the formation of a detectable truncated APC protein but apparently resulted in a null allele. Evaluation of the clinical phenotypes in the patients suggested that they exhibited features of an unusual form of FAP characterized by a slightly delayed age of onset of colorectal cancer and a reduced number of colorectal polyps. The latter were mainly sessile and were located predominantly in the proximal colon. To our knowledge, this is the first description of FAP caused by a reciprocal translocation disrupting the APC gene.

26797314
Disruption of the APC gene by t(5;7) translocation in a Turcot family
Turcot syndrome (TS) refers to the combination of colorectal polyps and primary tumours of the central nervous system. TS is a heterogeneous genetic condition due to APC and/or mismatch repair germline mutations. When APC is involved the vast majority of mutations are truncating, but in approximately 20%-30% of patients with familial polyposis no germline mutation can be found. A 30-year-old Caucasian woman with a positive pedigree for TS was referred to our Genetic Counselling Service. She was negative for APC and MUTYH but showed a reciprocal balanced translocation t(5;7)(q22;p15) at chromosome analysis. FISH analysis using specific BAC probes demonstrated that 5q22 breakpoint disrupted the APC gene. Transcript analysis by MLPA and digital PCR revealed that the cytogenetic rearrangement involving the 3' end of the APC gene caused a defective expression of a truncated transcript. This result allowed cytogenetic analysis to be offered to all the other family members and segregation analysis clearly demonstrated that all the carriers were affected, whereas non-carriers did not have the polyposis. A cytogenetic approach permitted the identification of the mutation-causing disease in this family, and the segregation analysis together with the transcript study supported the pathogenetic role of this mutation. Karyotype analysis was used as a predictive test in all members of this family. This family suggests that clinically positive TS and FAP cases, which test negative with standard molecular analysis, could be easily and cost-effectively resolved by a classical and molecular cytogenetic approach.

