17632790
Ataxia-telangiectasia: mild neurological presentation despite null ATM mutation and severe cellular phenotype.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, susceptibility to cancer, genomic instability, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation. A-T is caused by mutations that eliminate or inactivate the nuclear protein kinase ATM, the chief activator of the cellular response to double strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. Mild A-T is usually caused by ATM mutations that leave residual amounts of active ATM. We studied two siblings with mild A-T, as defined by clinical examination and a quantitative A-T neurological index. Surprisingly, no ATM was detected in the patients' cells, and sequence analysis revealed that they were homozygous for a truncating ATM mutation (5653delA) that is expected to lead to the classical, severe neurological presentation. Moreover, the cellular phenotype of these patients was indistinguishable from that of classical A-T: all the tested parameters of the DSB response were severely defective as in typical A-T. This analysis shows that the severity of the neurological component of A-T is determined not only by ATM mutations but also by other influences yet to be found.

9497252
Genotype-phenotype relationships in ataxia-telangiectasia and variants.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. A-T cells are sensitive to ionizing radiation and radiomimetic chemicals and fail to activate cell-cycle checkpoints after treatment with these agents. The responsible gene, ATM, encodes a large protein kinase with a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like domain. The typical A-T phenotype is caused, in most cases, by null ATM alleles that truncate or severely destabilize the ATM protein. Rare patients with milder manifestations of the clinical or cellular characteristics of the disease have been reported and have been designated "A-T variants." A special variant form of A-T is A-TFresno, which combines a typical A-T phenotype with microcephaly and mental retardation. The possible association of these syndromes with ATM is both important for understanding their molecular basis and essential for counseling and diagnostic purposes. We quantified ATM-protein levels in six A-T variants, and we searched their ATM genes for mutations. Cell lines from these patients exhibited considerable variability in radiosensitivity while showing the typical radioresistant DNA synthesis of A-T cells. Unlike classical A-T patients, these patients exhibited 1%-17% of the normal level of ATM. The underlying ATM genotypes were either homozygous for mutations expected to produce mild phenotypes or compound heterozygotes for a mild and a severe mutation. An A-TFresno cell line was found devoid of the ATM protein and homozygous for a severe ATM mutation. We conclude that certain "A-T variant" phenotypes represent ATM mutations, including some of those without telangiectasia. Our findings extend the range of phenotypes associated with ATM mutations.

15279810
Ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD)-its clinical presentation and molecular basis.
Comparison of the clinical and cellular phenotypes of different genomic instability syndromes provides new insights into functional links in the complex network of the DNA damage response. A prominent example of this principle is provided by examination of three such disorders: ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) caused by lack or inactivation of the ATM protein kinase, which mobilises the cellular response to double strand breaks in the DNA; ataxia-telangiectasia-like disease (ATLD), a result of deficiency of the human Mre11 protein; and the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), which represents defective Nbs1 protein. Mre11 and Nbs1 are members of the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) protein complex. MRN and its individual components are involved in different responses to cellular damage induced by ionising radiation and radiomimetic chemicals, including complexing with chromatin and with other damage response proteins, formation of radiation-induced foci, and the induction of different cell cycle checkpoints. The phosphorylation of Nbs1 by ATM would indicate that ATM acts upstream of the MRN complex. Consistent with this were the suggestions that ATM could be activated in the absence of fully functional Nbs1 protein. In contrast, the regulation of some ATM target proteins, e.g. Smc1 requires the MRN complex as well as ATM. Nbs1 may, therefore, be both a substrate for ATM and a mediator of ATM function. Recent studies that indicate a requirement of the MRN complex for proper ATM activation suggest that the relationship between ATM and the MRN complex in the DNA damage response is yet to be fully determined. Despite the fact that both Mre11 and Nbs1 are part of the same MRN complex, deficiency in either protein in humans does not lead to the same clinical picture. This suggests that components of the complex may also act separately.

16380133
Mutation analysis of the ATM gene in two Chinese patients with ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, elevated alpha-fetoprotein level, chromosomal instability, predisposition to cancer, and radiation sensitivity. Although a lot of mutations in the ATM gene have been described, there is still no report about ATM mutations in Chinese population. Using a molecular approach, we screened for ATM mutations in two patients from two unrelated Chinese families. 100 normal controls were analyzed to exclude possibility of polymorphism. Two novel mutations in the ATM gene were identified. The first one is a novel, homozygous, 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) missense mutation. The second one is a compound heterozygous mutation, which consists of a novel, 610G>T (Gly204Stop) nonsense mutation, combined with a previously reported, 6679C>T (Arg2227Cys) missense mutation. The transversions 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) and 610G>T (Gly204Stop) are not localized either in the conserved PI-3 kinase domain or in the other domains of the ATM protein. The phenotypic features were characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular telangiectasia, elevated alpha-fetoprotein level, immunodeficiency (agammaglo-bulinemia and T-cell defect), and rearrangements of chromosomes 7 and 14; brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy, brain SPECT showed cerebellar regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) hypoperfusion. To our knowledge, this is the first report of ATM mutations in Mainland China, in which the transversions 1346G>C (Gly449Ala) and 610G>T (Gly204Stop) are two novel, disease-causing mutations.

16627474
Nuclear ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) mediates the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks in human neuron-like cells.
The protein kinase ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) activates the cellular response to double strand breaks (DSBs), a highly cytotoxic DNA lesion. ATM is activated by DSBs and in turn phosphorylates key players in numerous damage response pathways. ATM is missing or inactivated in the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is characterized by neuronal degeneration, immunodeficiency, genomic instability, radiation sensitivity, and cancer predisposition. The predominant symptom of A-T is a progressive loss of movement coordination due to ongoing degeneration of the cerebellar cortex and peripheral neuropathy. A major deficiency in understanding A-T is the lack of information on the role of ATM in neurons. It is unclear whether the ATM-mediated DSB response operates in these cells similarly to proliferating cells. Furthermore, ATM was reported to be cytoplasmic in neurons and suggested to function in these cells in capacities other than the DNA damage response. Recently we obtained genetic molecular evidence that the neuronal degeneration in A-T does result from defective DNA damage response. We therefore undertook to investigate this response in a model system of human neuron-like cells (NLCs) obtained by neuronal differentiation in culture. ATM was largely nuclear in NLCs, and their ATM-mediated responses to DSBs were similar to those of proliferating cells. Knocking down ATM did not interfere with neuronal differentiation but abolished ATM-mediated damage responses in NLCs. We concluded that nuclear ATM mediates the DSB response in NLCs similarly to in proliferating cells. Attempts to understand the neurodegeneration in A-T should be directed to investigating the DSB response in the nervous system.

18408079
Mutations in String/CDC25 inhibit cell cycle re-entry and neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of Ataxia telangiectasia.
Mutations in ATM (Ataxia telangiectasia mutated) result in Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T), a disorder characterized by progressive neurodegeneration. Despite advances in understanding how ATM signals cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, and apoptosis in response to DNA damage, it remains unclear why loss of ATM causes degeneration of post-mitotic neurons and why the neurological phenotype of ATM-null individuals varies in severity. To address these issues, we generated a Drosophila model of A-T. RNAi knockdown of ATM in the eye caused progressive degeneration of adult neurons in the absence of exogenously induced DNA damage. Heterozygous mutations in select genes modified the neurodegeneration phenotype, suggesting that genetic background underlies variable neurodegeneration in A-T. The neuroprotective activity of ATM may be negatively regulated by deacetylation since mutations in a protein deacetylase gene, RPD3, suppressed neurodegeneration, and a human homolog of RPD3, histone deacetylase 2, bound ATM and abrogated ATM activation in cell culture. Moreover, knockdown of ATM in post-mitotic neurons caused cell cycle re-entry, and heterozygous mutations in the cell cycle activator gene String/CDC25 inhibited cell cycle re-entry and neurodegeneration. Thus, we hypothesize that ATM performs a cell cycle checkpoint function to protect post-mitotic neurons from degeneration and that cell cycle re-entry causes neurodegeneration in A-T.

22213089
Presence of ATM protein and residual kinase activity correlates with the phenotype in ataxia-telangiectasia: a genotype-phenotype study.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder with multisystem involvement and cancer predisposition, caused by mutations in the A-T mutated (ATM) gene. To study genotype-phenotype correlations, we evaluated the clinical and laboratory data of 51 genetically proven A-T patients, and additionally measured ATM protein expression and kinase activity. Patients without ATM kinase activity showed the classical phenotype. The presence of ATM protein, correlated with slightly better immunological function. Residual kinase activity correlated with a milder and essentially different neurological phenotype, absence of telangiectasia, normal endocrine and pulmonary function, normal immunoglobulins, significantly lower X-ray hypersensitivity in lymphocytes, and extended lifespan. In these patients, cancer occurred later in life and generally consisted of solid instead of lymphoid malignancies. The genotypes of severely affected patients generally included truncating mutations resulting in total absence of ATM kinase activity, while patients with milder phenotypes harbored at least one missense or splice site mutation resulting in expression of ATM with some kinase activity. Overall, the phenotypic manifestations in A-T show a continuous spectrum from severe classical childhood-onset A-T to a relatively mild adult-onset disorder, depending on the presence of ATM protein and kinase activity. Each patient is left with a tremendously increased cancer risk.

21833744
Characterisation of ATM mutations in Slavic Ataxia telangiectasia patients.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a genomic instability syndrome characterised, among others, by progressive cerebellar degeneration, oculocutaneous telangiectases, immunodeficiency, elevated serum alpha-phetoprotein level, chromosomal breakage, hypersensitivity to ionising radiation and increased cancer risk. This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene coding for serine/threonine protein kinase with a crucial role in response to DNA double-strand breaks. We characterised genotype and phenotype of 12 Slavic AT patients from 11 families. Mutation analysis included sequencing of the entire coding sequence, adjacent intron regions, 3'UTR and 5'UTR of the ATM gene and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the detection of large deletions/duplications at the ATM locus. The high incidence of new and individual mutations demonstrates a marked mutational heterogeneity of AT in the Czech Republic. Our data indicate that sequence analysis of the entire coding region of ATM is sufficient for a high detection rate of mutations in ATM and that MLPA analysis for the detection of deletions/duplications seems to be redundant in the Slavic population.

21965147
New mutations in the ATM gene and clinical data of 25 AT patients.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, chromosomal instability, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. The gene mutated in the patients, ATM, encodes a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase family proteins. The ATM protein has a key role in the cellular response to DNA damage. Truncating and splice site mutations in ATM have been found in most patients with the classical AT phenotype. Here we report of our extensive ATM mutation screening on 25 AT patients from 19 families of different ethnic origin. Previously unknown mutations were identified in six patients including a new homozygous missense mutation, c.8110T>C (p.Cys2704Arg), in a severely affected patient. Comprehensive clinical data are presented for all patients described here along with data on ATM function generated by analysis of cell lines established from a subset of the patients.

11382771
Residual ataxia telangiectasia mutated protein function in cells from ataxia telangiectasia patients, with 5762ins137 and 7271T-->G mutations, showing a less severe phenotype.
We have assessed several ataxia Telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-dependent functions in cells derived from ataxia telangiectasia patients, carrying either an ATM 5762ins137 splice site or a 7271T-->G missense mutation, with a less severe phenotype compared with the classical disorder. ATM kinase in vitro, from 5762ins137 cells, showed the same specific activity as ATM in normal cells, but the protein was present at low levels. In contrast, mutant ATM kinase activity in the 7271T-->G cells was only about 6% that of the activity in normal cells, although the level of mutant protein expressed was similar to normal cells. Phosphorylation of the DNA double strand break repair proteins Nbs1 and hMre11, following DNA damage, was observed in normal and 7271T-->G cells but was almost absent in both 5762ins137 and classical ataxia telangiectasia cells. The kinetics of p53 response was intermediate between normal and classical ataxia telangiectasia cells in both the 7271T-->G and 5762ins137 cells, but interestingly, c-Jun kinase activation following DNA damage was equally deficient in cell lines derived from all the ataxia telangiectasia patients. Our results indicate that levels of ATM kinase activity, but not induction of p53 or c-Jun kinase activity, in these cells correlate with the degree of neurological disorder in the patients.

23454770
p53 centrosomal localization diagnoses ataxia-telangiectasia homozygotes and heterozygotes.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by radiosensitivity, genomic instability, and predisposition to cancer. A-T is caused by biallelic mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, but heterozygous carriers, though apparently healthy, are believed to be at increased risk for cancer and more sensitive to ionizing radiation than the general population. Despite progress in functional and sequencing-based assays, no straightforward, rapid, and inexpensive test is available for the identification of A-T homozygotes and heterozygotes, which is essential for diagnosis, genetic counseling, and carrier prediction. The oncosuppressor p53 prevents genomic instability and centrosomal amplification. During mitosis, p53 localizes at the centrosome in an ATM-dependent manner. We capitalized on the latter finding and established a simple, fast, minimally invasive, reliable, and inexpensive test to determine mutant ATM zygosity. The percentage of mitotic lymphoblasts or PBMCs bearing p53 centrosomal localization clearly discriminated among healthy donors (>75%), A-T heterozygotes (40%-56%), and A-T homozygotes (<30%). The test is specific for A-T, independent of the type of ATM mutations, and recognized tumor-associated ATM polymorphisms. In a preliminary study, our test confirmed that ATM is a breast cancer susceptibility gene. These data open the possibility of cost-effective, early diagnosis of A-T homozygotes and large-scale screenings for heterozygotes.

17998902
Targeted integration of functional human ATM cDNA into genome mediated by HSV/AAV hybrid amplicon vector.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, cancer predisposition, genome instability, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR). We have previously shown that a herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) amplicon vector carrying the human ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) complementary DNA (cDNA) is able to correct aspects of the cellular phenotype of human A-T cells in culture, and is also able to transfer the ATM cDNA to the Atm(-/-) mouse cerebellum. In order to achieve stable gene replacement, we have generated an HSV/adeno-associated virus (AAV) hybrid amplicon vector carrying the expression cassettes for the ATM cDNA [(9.2 kilobases (kb)] and enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), flanked by AAV inverted terminal repeats (ITRs). This hybrid vector, in the presence of AAV Rep proteins, mediates site-specific integration into the AAVS1 site on chromosome 19 in human cells and in Atm(-/-) mice carrying that human locus. The functional activity of the vector-derived ATM was confirmed in vitro and in vivo by ATM autophosphorylation at Ser-1981 after IR. This proof-of-principle study establishes the ability of HSV/AAV hybrid amplicon vectors to mediate functional targeted integration of the ATM cDNA into A-T cells in culture and in Atm(-/-) mice in vivo, thus laying a foundation for possible gene therapy approaches in the treatment of A-T patients.

16189143
Molecular pathology of ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is one of a group of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias. Presentation is usually by the age of 2 years and ataxia of both upper and lower limbs develops, such that by early teenage most patients require a wheelchair for mobility. Speech and eye movement are also affected. Other important features are t(7;14) translocations, immunodeficiency, a high serum alpha fetoprotein concentration, growth retardation, telangiectasia-most noticeably on the bulbar conjunctiva-and a very high risk of developing a lymphoid tumour. Patients also show an increased sensitivity to ionising radiation. The classic form of A-T results from the presence of two truncating ATM mutations, leading to total loss of the ATM protein, a protein kinase. Importantly, A-T shows clinical heterogeneity, including milder forms where neurological progression may be slower or of later onset. In these cases there is a correlation between the preservation of neurological function, decreased radiosensitivity, and the degree of retained ATM protein kinase activity. Considerable scope remains for understanding the progress of the disorder in relation to the types of ATM mutation present.

18505428
Immunodeficiency in ataxia telangiectasia is correlated strongly with the presence of two null mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene.
Immunodeficiency affects over half of all patients with ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) and when present can contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality. A retrospective review of clinical history, immunological findings, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) enzyme activity and ATM mutation type was conducted on 80 consecutive patients attending the National Clinic for Ataxia Telangiectasia, Nottingham, UK between 1994 and 2006. The aim was to characterize the immunodeficiency in A-T and determine its relationship to the ATM mutations present. Sixty-one patients had mutations resulting in complete loss of ATM kinase activity (group A) and 19 patients had leaky splice or missense mutations resulting in residual kinase activity (group B). There was a significantly higher proportion of patients with recurrent sinopulmonary infections in group A compared with group B (31 of 61 versus four of 19 P = 0.03) and a greater need for prophylactic antibiotics (30 of 61 versus one of 19 P = 0.001). Comparing group A with group B patients, 25 of 46 had undetectable/low immunoglobulin A (IgA) levels compared with none of 19; T cell lymphopenia was found in 28 of 56 compared with one of 18 and B cell lymphopenia in 35 of 55 compared with four of 18 patients (P = 0.00004, 0.001 and 0.003 respectively). Low IgG2 subclass levels and low levels of antibodies to pneumococcal polysaccharide were more common in group A than group B (16 of 27 versus one of 11 P = 0.01; 34/43 versus six of 17 P = 0.002) patients. Ig replacement therapy was required in 10 (12.5%) of the whole cohort, all in group A. In conclusion, A-T patients with no ATM kinase activity had a markedly more severe immunological phenotype than those expressing low levels of ATM activity.

15843990
ATM haplotypes and associated mutations in Iranian patients with ataxia-telangiectasia: recurring homozygosity without a founder haplotype.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. The ATM gene spans more than 150 kb at chromosomal region 11q23.1 and encodes a product of 3,056 amino acids. The ATM protein is a serine/threonine protein kinase and is involved in oxidative stress, cell cycle control, and DNA repair. We analyzed the 11q22-23 haplotypes and associated mutations of 16 Iranian families. We utilized standardized short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes to enhance mutation identification. In addition to the STR markers, single-nucleotide polymorphism haplotypes were determined, using three critical polymorphisms. The entire gene was screened sequentially by protein truncation testing, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography to identify the disease-causing mutations. Of the expected 32 mutations, 25 (78%) were identified. All but two mutations led to a truncated or null form of the ATM protein (nonsense, splice site, or frameshift). Twelve mutations were identified for 15 haplotypes. Five mutations were novel. Mutations were located throughout the entire gene, with no clustering. Despite the absence of an Iranian founder mutation, three-fourths of the families were homozygous, suggesting that many undetected ATM mutations still exist in Iran. This study establishes a database for Iranian A-T families, and extends the global spectrum of ATM mutations.

22071889
Underexpression and abnormal localization of ATM products in ataxia telangiectasia patients bearing ATM missense mutations.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immune defects and predisposition to malignancies. A-T is caused by biallelic inactivation of the ATM gene, in most cases by frameshift or nonsense mutations. More rarely, ATM missense mutations with unknown consequences on ATM function are found, making definitive diagnosis more challenging. In this study, a series of 15 missense mutations, including 11 not previously reported, were identified in 16 patients with clinical diagnosis of A-T belonging to 14 families and 1 patient with atypical clinical features. ATM function was evaluated in patient lymphoblastoid cell lines by measuring H2AX and KAP1 phosphorylation in response to ionizing radiation, confirming the A-T diagnosis for 16 cases. In accordance with previous studies, we showed that missense mutations associated with A-T often lead to ATM protein underexpression (15 out of 16 cases). In addition, we demonstrated that most missense mutations lead to an abnormal cytoplasmic localization of ATM, correlated with its decreased expression. This new finding highlights ATM mislocalization as a new mechanism of ATM dysfunction, which may lead to therapeutic strategies for missense mutation associated A-T.

14532133
Requirement of the MRN complex for ATM activation by DNA damage.
The ATM protein kinase is a primary activator of the cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). In response to DSBs, ATM is activated and phosphorylates key players in various branches of the DNA damage response network. ATM deficiency causes the genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, radiation sensitivity, chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition. The MRN complex, whose core contains the Mre11, Rad50 and Nbs1 proteins, is involved in the initial processing of DSBs. Hypomorphic mutations in the NBS1 and MRE11 genes lead to two other genomic instability disorders: the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) and A-T like disease (A-TLD), respectively. The order in which ATM and MRN act in the early phase of the DSB response is unclear. Here we show that functional MRN is required for ATM activation, and consequently for timely activation of ATM-mediated pathways. Collectively, these and previous results assign to components of the MRN complex roles upstream and downstream of ATM in the DNA damage response pathway and explain the clinical resemblance between A-T and A-TLD.

16832357
ATM mutations that cause ataxia-telangiectasia are breast cancer susceptibility alleles.
We screened individuals from 443 familial breast cancer pedigrees and 521 controls for ATM sequence variants and identified 12 mutations in affected individuals and two in controls (P = 0.0047). The results demonstrate that ATM mutations that cause ataxia-telangiectasia in biallelic carriers are breast cancer susceptibility alleles in monoallelic carriers, with an estimated relative risk of 2.37 (95% confidence interval (c.i.) = 1.51-3.78, P = 0.0003). There was no evidence that other classes of ATM variant confer a risk of breast cancer.

11246219
Expression of ATM in ataxia telangiectasia fibroblasts rescues defects in DNA double-strand break repair in nuclear extracts.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a human genetic disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar degeneration, hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR), immunodeficiency, and high cancer risk. At the cellular level, IR sensitivity and increased frequency of spontaneous and IR-induced chromosomal breakage and rearrangements are the hallmarks of A-T. The ATM gene, mutated in this syndrome, has been cloned and codes for a protein sharing homology with DNA-PKcs, a protein kinase involved in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair and DNA damage responses. The characteristics of the A-T cellular phenotypes and ATM gene suggest that ATM may play a role similar to that of DNA-PKcs in DSB repair and that there is a primary DNA repair defect in A-T cells. In the current study, the function of ATM in DNA DSB repair was evaluated in an in vitro system using two plasmids, carrying either an EcoRI-induced DSB within the lacZalpha gene or various endonuclease-induced DSB in the SupF suppressor tRNA gene. We found that the DSB repair efficiency in A-T nuclear extracts was comparable to, if not higher than, that in normal nuclear extracts. However, the repair fidelity in A-T nuclear extracts was decreased when repairing DSB with short 5' and 3' overhangs (<4 base pairs (bp)) or blunt ends, but not 5' 4-bp overhangs. Sequencing of the mutant plasmids revealed that deletions involving 1-6 nucleotide microhomologies were the major class of mutations in both A-T and normal extracts. However, the size of the deletions in plasmids from A-T nuclear extracts was larger than that from normal nuclear extracts. Expression of the ATM protein in A-T cells corrected the defect in DSB repair in A-T nuclear extracts. These results suggest that ATM plays a role in maintaining genomic stability by preventing the repair of DSB from an error-prone pathway.

16150740
Impaired genomic stability and increased oxidative stress exacerbate different features of Ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a multisystem, cancer-predisposing genetic disorder caused by deficiency of the ATM protein. To dissect the A-T phenotype, we augmented specific features of the human disease by generating mouse strains that combine Atm deficiency with dysfunction of other proteins. Increasing oxidative stress by combining deficiencies in Atm and superoxide dismutase 1 (Sod1) exacerbated growth retardation and markedly reduced the mean survival time following ionizing radiation. In contrast, increasing genomic instability by combining deficiencies of Atm and the mismatch repair protein Mlh1 caused a moderate increase in radiation sensitivity and dramatic increase in aggressive lymphomas, compared with thes Atm-/- single knockout. Remarkably, Atm, Mlh1 or Mlh1/Atm single or double heterozygosity did not significantly affect the life span of the various genotypes. Mlh1/Atm double null tumors were polyclonal, whereas the tumors in other genotypes were mono- or oligoclonal, demonstrating the high predisposition of thymocytes with this genotype to become malignant. Chromosomal aberrations in the tumors were localized mainly in chromosomes 12 and 15. The genomic region on chromosome 15, which contains the gene for the c-Myc oncoprotein, was commonly amplified, and elevated levels of the c-Myc protein were subsequently observed in the tumors. Our data suggest that impaired genomic instability is an important contributing factor to cancer predisposition in A-T, whereas oxidative stress is more important in the radiation sensitivity and growth retardation facets of this disease.

17525940
A novel phenotypic marker for ATM-deficient 129S6/SvEvTac-ATMtm1Awb/J mice.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a human autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neuronal degeneration as well as many other physiological and somatic defects. ATM (A-T, mutated), the gene mutated in A-T, encodes a 370 kDa protein kinase. ATM knockout mouse models (ATM(-/-)) show growth retardation, infertility, neurological dysfunction, defects in T-lymphocytes, and extreme sensitivity to ionizing radiation. We have recently established multiple ATM(+/-) breeding pairs and discovered that all ATM(-/-) offspring exhibit a nonpigmented section of tail, usually at or near the tip. To our knowledge, this is the first time that a phenotype of nonpigmented tail has been reported in ATM(-/-) knockout mice. We believe that the sections of nonpigmented tail of 129S6/SvEvTac-ATM(tm1Awb)/J mice provide a novel phenotypic marker for research using this ATM knockout mouse model. Results from histochemistry and immunoblotting analysis further demonstrate that while melanocyte precursors or melanoblasts are present in the nonpigmented tail tissue of ATM(-/-) mice, they fail to differentiate fully into mature melanocytes. The potential connection between this phenotype and other clinical symptoms caused by ATM deficiency, such as progressive neuronal degeneration, is discussed in this article.

18634022
Functional and computational assessment of missense variants in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene: mutations with increased cancer risk.
The functional consequences of missense variants are often difficult to predict. This becomes especially relevant when DNA sequence changes are used to determine a diagnosis or prognosis. To analyze the consequences of 12 missense variants in patients with mild forms of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), we employed site-directed mutagenesis of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) cDNA followed by stable transfections into a single A-T cell line to isolate the effects of each allele on the cellular phenotype. After induction of the transfected cells with CdCl2, we monitored for successful ATM transcription and subsequently assessed: 1) intracellular ATM protein levels; 2) ionizing radiation (IR)-induced ATM kinase activity; and 3) cellular radiosensitivity. We then calculated SIFT and PolyPhen scores for the missense changes. Nine variants produced little or no correction of the A-T cellular phenotype and were interpreted to be ATM mutations; SIFT/PolyPhen scores supported this. Three variants corrected the cellular phenotype, suggesting that they represented benign variants or polymorphisms. SIFT and PolyPhen scores supported the functional analyses for one of these variants (c.1709T>C); the other two were predicted to be "not tolerated" (c.6188G>A and c.6325T>G) and were classified as "operationally neutral." Genotype/phenotype relationships were compared: three deleterious missense variants were associated with an increased risk of cancer (c.6679C>T, c.7271T>G, and c.8494C>T). In situ mutagenesis represents an effective experimental approach for distinguishing deleterious missense mutations from benign or operationally neutral missense variants.

19455703
Breaks invisible to the DNA damage response machinery accumulate in ATM-deficient cells.
After irradiation, ATM defective cells accumulate unrepaired double strand breaks (DSBs) for several cell divisions. At the chromosome level, unresolved DSBs appear as chromosome breaks that can be efficiently scored by using telomeric and mFISH probes. H2AX is immediately activated by ATM in response to DNA damage and its phosphorylated form, gammaH2AX, flanks the DSB through several megabases. The gammaH2AX-labeling status of broken chromosome ends was analyzed in AT cells to check whether the DNA damage response was accurately taking place in these persistent DSBs. The results show that one quarter of the scored breaks are devoid of gammaH2AX foci in metaphase spreads from ATM-deficient cells, and this fraction is significantly higher than in normal cells (chi(2) < 0.05). Accumulation of sensor and repair proteins at damaged sites is a key event in the cellular response to DSBs, so MRE11 labeling at broken ends was also analyzed. While all gammaH2AX foci scored at visible broken ends colocalize with MRE11 foci, all gammaH2AX-unlabeled breaks are also devoid of MRE11-labeling. The present results suggest that a significant subset of the AT long-lived DSBs may persist as "invisible" DSBs due to deficient detection by the DNA damage repair machinery. Eventually the properly signaled DSBs will be repaired while invisible breaks may indefinitely accumulate; most probably contributing to the AT cells' well known genomic instability.

22146522
Severe reaction to radiotherapy for breast cancer as the presenting feature of ataxia telangiectasia.
BACKGROUND: Severe early and late radiation reaction to radiotherapy is extremely rare in breast cancer patients. Such a reaction prompted an investigation into a 44-year-old mother (patient A-T213). METHODS: A neurological examination was performed and blood lymphocytes and skin fibroblasts were assessed for radiosensitivity chromosomally and by colony-forming assay. The ATM gene was sequenced and ATM mutations modelled by site-directed mutagenesis. The ATM kinase activity was also assessed. RESULTS: Patient A-T213 was normally ambulant with no ataxia and minimal other neurological features. T lymphocytes and skin fibroblasts were unusually radiosensitive, although less sensitive than in classical ataxia telangiectasia (A-T). A lymphoblastoid cell line and skin fibroblasts expressed ATM protein with some retained kinase activity. One missense ATM mutation c.8672G>A (p.Gly2891Asp) and a c.1A>G substitution were identified. In the modelling system, the p.Gly2891Asp mutant protein was expressed and shown to have residual ATM kinase activity. CONCLUSION: Patient A-T213 has a milder form of A-T with biallelic ATM mutations, which may have contributed to breast cancer development, and certainly caused the severe radiation reaction. Ataxia telangiectasia should be investigated as a potential cause of untoward severe early and late radiation reactions in breast cancer patients.

21792198
Lymphoid tumours and breast cancer in ataxia telangiectasia; substantial protective effect of residual ATM kinase activity against childhood tumours.
BACKGROUND: Immunodeficiency in ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is less severe in patients expressing some mutant or normal ATM kinase activity. We, therefore, determined whether expression of residual ATM kinase activity also protected against tumour development in A-T. METHODS: From a total of 296 consecutive genetically confirmed A-T patients from the British Isles and the Netherlands, we identified 66 patients who developed a malignant tumour; 47 lymphoid tumours and 19 non-lymphoid tumours were diagnosed. We determined their ATM mutations, and whether cells from these patients expressed any ATM with residual ATM kinase activity. RESULTS: In childhood, total absence of ATM kinase activity was associated, almost exclusively, with development of lymphoid tumours. There was an overwhelming preponderance of tumours in patients <16 years without kinase activity compared with those with some residual activity, consistent with a substantial protective effect of residual ATM kinase activity against tumour development in childhood. In addition, the presence of eight breast cancers in A-T patients, a 30-fold increased risk, establishes breast cancer as part of the A-T phenotype. CONCLUSION: Overall, a spectrum of tumour types is associated with A-T, consistent with involvement of ATM in different mechanisms of tumour formation. Tumour type was influenced by ATM allelic heterogeneity, residual ATM kinase activity and age.

18383876
The ATM gene and ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare neurodegenerative, autosomal recessive disorder characterized by chromosome instability, radiosensitivity, immunodeficiency and a predisposition for cancer. Epidemiological studies have shown that AT heterozygotes have a predisposition for cancer, especially for breast cancer in women. The disease is caused by mutations in the ATM gene, leading to total loss of the ATM protein, which normally recognizes DNA damage, activates the DNA repair machinery and the cell cycle check points in order to minimize the risk of genetic damage. This review summarizes the clinical features of AT and the natural history of the disease and puts recent molecular advances into the context of the cellular and clinical phenotype.

22006793
Functional characterization and targeted correction of ATM mutations identified in Japanese patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
A recent challenge for investigators studying the progressive neurological disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is to identify mutations whose effects might be alleviated by mutation-targeted therapies. We studied ATM mutations in eight families of Japanese A-T patients (JPAT) and were able to identify all 16 mutations. The probands were compound heterozygotes in seven families, and one (JPAT2) was homozygous for a frameshift mutation. All mutations--four frameshift, two nonsense, four large genomic deletions, and six affecting splicing--were novel except for c.748C>T found in family JPAT6 and c.2639-384A>G found in family JPAT11/12. Using an established lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) of patient JPAT11, ATM protein was restored to levels approaching wild type by exposure to an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide designed to correct a pseudoexon splicing mutation. In addition, in an LCL from patient JPAT8/9, a heterozygous carrier of a nonsense mutation, ATM levels could also be partially restored by exposure to readthrough compounds (RTCs): an aminoglycoside, G418, and a novel small molecule identified in our laboratory, RTC13. Taken together, our results suggest that screening and functional characterization of the various sorts of mutations affecting the ATM gene can lead to better identification of A-T patients who are most likely to benefit from rapidly developing mutation-targeted therapeutic technologies.

16038621
Molecular basis of ataxia telangiectasia and related diseases.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human disease characterized by extreme cellular sensitivity to radiation and a predisposition to cancer, with a hallmark of onset in early childhood. Several human diseases also share similar symptoms with AT albeit with different degrees of severity and different associated disorders. While all AT patients contain mutations in the AT-mutated gene (ATM), most other AT-like disorders are defective in genes encoding an MRN protein complex consisting of Mre11, Rad50 and Nbs1. Both ATM and MRN function as cellular sensors to DNA double-strand breaks, which lead to the recruitment and phosphorylation of an array of substrate proteins involved in DNA repair, apoptosis and cell-cycle checkpoints, as well as gene regulation, translation initiation and telomere maintenance. ATM is a member of the family of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like protein kinases (PIKK), and the discovery of many ATM substrates provides the underlying mechanisms of heterologous symptoms among AT patients. This review article focuses on recent findings related to the initial recognition of double-strand breaks by ATM and MRN, as well as a DNA-dependent protein kinase complex consisting of the heterodimer Ku70/Ku80 and its catalytic subunit DNA-PKcs, another member of PIKK. This possible interaction suggests that a much greater complex is involved in sensing, transducing and co-ordinating cellular events in response to genome instability.

17933474
Characterization of the porcine ATM gene: towards the generation of a novel non-murine animal model for Ataxia-Telangiectasia.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is a genetic disorder causing cerebellar degeneration, immune deficiency, cancer predisposition, chromosomal instability and radiation sensitivity. Among the mutations responsible for A-T, 85% represent truncating mutations that result in the production of shorter, highly unstable forms of ATM (AT-mutated) protein leading to a null ATM phenotype. Several ATM-deficient mice have been created however none reflects the extent of neurological degeneration observed in humans. In an attempt to identify an alternative animal model, we have characterized the porcine ortholog of ATM (pATM). When compared to the human ATM (hATM), the pATM showed a high level of homology in the coding region, particularly in the regions coding for functional domains, and had extensive alternative splicing of the 5'UTR, characteristic for the human ATM mRNA. Six different 5'UTRs resulting from alternative splicing of the first three exons were identified. The porcine 5'UTRs varied in size, had multiple ATG codons and different secondary structures, supporting the possibility of complex transcriptional regulation. Three of the six transcripts demonstrated alternative splicing of exon 3, the first putative coding exon, altering the translation start and giving rise to a putative protein lacking the N-terminus substrate binding domain (82-89 aa) involved in activation of human p53 and BRCA1 pathways. Real time-PCR analysis revealed variable expression levels of total ATM transcripts in individual tissues. Although each splice variant was ubiquitously expressed among the tissues, differences in the relative abundances of specific 5'UTRs were observed. The extensive alternative splicing of the pATM gene resembles the complex splicing observed in the hATM and could provide insights for differences observed between mice and humans with regards to the onset of A-T. Thus, the pig may provide a more relevant clinical model of A-T.

16180724
Ataxia-telangiectasia genes and breast cancer risk in a French family study.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive early childhood disorder, characterized by progressive neuronal degeneration, immunological deficiency, radiosensitivity and an increased risk of cancer caused in most cases by mutations in the AT-mutated gene (ATM). Epidemiological studies on AT families have shown that AT heterozygous women have an increased risk of developing breast cancer (BC). The ATM protein plays a central role in the recognition and repair of DNA double-strand breaks and the subsequent activation of cell-cycle checkpoints. Whilst AT is a rare disease, 0.5-1 % of the general population are estimated to be AT mutation carriers, thus any increases in the risks of cancer associated with ATM carrier status are of public health relevance. The main results of our published studies on the risk of BC in 34 French AT families according to heterozygote status, type of ATM mutation and exogenous factors are summarized here. The risk of BC was higher in ATM heterozygous (HetATM) women and did not differ significantly according to the type of ATM mutation (missense vs truncating) carried by the AT family members but appeared associated with the position of some truncating mutations in certain binding domains of the ATM protein. The effect of exogenous factors, such as reproductive life factors and exposure to ionizing radiation, on the risk of BC according to ATM heterozygote status was assessed. There was no evidence for interaction (except for age at first full-term pregnancy). These findings does not appear to justify a separate screening program from that already available to other women with a first-degree relative affected by BC, as their risks have similar amplitude. Chest X-rays did not appear to be a risk factor for BC in our study population. More powerful studies, using data sets pooled from international sources are being set up to confirm these observations.

21778326
Functional characterization connects individual patient mutations in ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) with dysfunction of specific DNA double-strand break-repair signaling pathways.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) has multiple functions in homologous recombination (HR) and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), which lead to conflicting data regarding its DNA double-strand break-repair (DSBR) functions in previous studies. To explore the effect of clinically relevant ATM mutations, we characterized DSBR between mutated EGFP genes and ATM kinase signaling in 9 lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT) with defined vs. 3 control LCLs without ATM mutations. Our study revealed that the DSBR phenotype in AT cells is not uniform but appears to depend on the mutation, causing up to 32-fold increased or up to 3-fold decreased activities in particular pathways. Comparison with a further 10 LCLs mutated in downstream factors (BRCA1, BRCA2, Nibrin, Rad50, and Chk2) showed that the most diametrically opposed DSBR patterns in AT cells phenocopied NBN/RAD50 or BRCA1 mutations. Notably, reexpressing wild-type ATM reversed these defects by 2.3- to 3.5-fold. Our data suggest that ATM stimulates repair proteins such as Nibrin, which execute HR, single-strand annealing (SSA), and NHEJ. Concomitantly, ATM minimizes error-prone repair (SSA and NHEJ) through activation of surveillance factors such as BRCA1. Since the outcome of the individual defect can be diametrically opposed, distinguishing repair patterns in patients with ATM mutations may also be relevant regarding therapeutic responses.

17126209
Relationship between DNA double-strand break rejoining and cell survival after exposure to ionizing radiation in human fibroblast strains with differing ATM/p53 status: implications for evaluation of clinical radiosensitivity.
PURPOSE: To better understand the impact of defects in the DNA damage-surveillance network on the various cell-based assays used for the prediction of patient radiosensitivity. METHODS AND MATERIALS: We examined noncancerous human fibroblast strains from individuals with ataxia telangiectasia (ataxia telangiectasia mutated [ATM] deficient) or Li-Fraumeni syndrome (p53 deficient) using the neutral comet, H2AX phosphorylation, and clonogenic survival assays. RESULTS: Using the comet assay, we found that, compared with normal fibroblasts, cells lacking either ATM or p53 function exhibited a reduced rate of double-strand break (DSB) rejoining early (< or =4 h) after exposure to 8 Gy of gamma-radiation and also exhibited high levels of unrejoined DSBs later after irradiation. ATM-deficient and p53-deficient fibroblasts also exhibited abnormally increased levels of phosphorylated H2AX (gamma-H2AX) at later intervals after irradiation. In the clonogenic assay, ATM-deficient cells exhibited marked radiosensitivity and p53-deficient cells had varying degrees of radioresistance compared with normal fibroblasts. CONCLUSION: Regardless of whether ataxia telangiectasia and Li-Fraumeni syndrome fibroblasts are DSB-repair deficient per se, it is apparent that p53 and ATM defects greatly influence the cellular phenotype as evidenced by the neutral comet and gamma-H2AX assays. Our data suggest that the gamma-H2AX levels observed at later intervals after irradiation may represent a reliable measure of the overall DSB rejoining capabilities of human fibroblasts. However, it appears that using this parameter as a predictor of radiosensitivity without knowledge of the cells' p53 status could lead to incorrect conclusions.

20676049
Loss of ATM positively regulates the expression of hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) through oxidative stress: Role in the physiopathology of the disease.
Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a wide variety of progressive clinical symptoms. This includes neuronal degeneration, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, diabetes mellitus, immunodeficiency, increased risk of cancer and sensitivity to ionizing radiation. The gene mutated in this disease, ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated), encodes a protein kinase involved in DNA double strand breaks signalling and repair. ATM deficient cells also display an increase in oxidative stress, by poorly characterized mechanism(s), which clearly contributes to the neurodegenerative aspect of the disease. Despite these advances, the occurrence of the vascular abnormalities, glucose intolerance and insulin resistance remains poorly understood. In different cellular models where ATM expression was disrupted, we demonstrated that the absence of ATM leads to an increased expression of both subunits of the transcription factor Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1 (HIF-1). We also observed enhanced trans-activating functions of HIF-1. HIF-1 is the central regulator of responses to hypoxia which induces the transcription of genes involved in angiogenesis (e.g., VEGF-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor) and cellular metabolism (e.g., GLUT-1). Interestingly, we demonstrated that ATM disruption positively regulates both expression and function of the basal glucose transporter GLUT-1 as well as the proangiogenic factor, VEGF. In addition, our results suggest that the absence of ATM increases HIF-1 proteins biosynthesis, and this effect is dependant on the oxidative stress existing in ATM deficient cells. Our compelling results highlight a new link between ATM deficiency and the clinical features of the disease and provide a molecular link between ATM downregulation and the increase in tumor angiogenesis observed in human breast cancers.

17124347
DHPLC screening of ATM gene in Italian patients affected by ataxia-telangiectasia: fourteen novel ATM mutations.
The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T:MIM: #208900), ATM, spans about 150 kb of genomic DNA and is composed of 62 coding exons. ATM mutations are found along the entire coding sequence of the gene, without evidence of mutational hot spots. Using DNA as the starting material, we used denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) technique to search for ATM gene mutations. Initially, DHPLC was validated in a retrospective study of 16 positive control samples that included 19 known mutations; 100% of mutations were detected. Subsequently, DHPLC was used to screen for mutations a cohort of 22 patients with the classical form of A-T. A total of 27 different mutations were identified on 38 of the 44 alleles, corresponding to a 86% detection rate. Fourteen of the mutations were novel. In addition, 15 different variants and polymorphisms of unknown functional significance were found. The high incidence of new and individual A-T mutations in our cohort of patients demonstrates marked mutational heterogeneity of A-T in Italy and corroborate the efficiency of DHPLC as a method for the mutation screening of A-T patients.

23143971
Very mild presentation in adult with classical cellular phenotype of ataxia telangiectasia.
BACKGROUND: The major clinical feature of ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is severe progressive neurodegeneration with onset in infancy. This classical A-T phenotype is caused by biallelic null mutations in the ATM gene, leading to the absence of ATM protein and increased cellular radiosensitivity. We report an unusual case of A-T in a 41-year-old mother, A-T210, who had very mild neurological symptoms despite complete loss of ATM protein. METHODS: A neurological examination was performed, cellular radiosensitivity was assessed, and the ATM gene was sequenced. Skin fibroblasts and a lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) were assayed for ATM protein expression and kinase activity. RESULTS: Patient A-T210 showed mild chorea, dystonia, and gait ataxia, walked independently, and drove a car. LCL and skin fibroblasts were radiosensitive and did not express ATM protein. Two ATM-null mutations were identified. CONCLUSIONS: The severe neurodegeneration resulting from loss of ATM can be mitigated in some circumstances.

18504682
Different clinical and immunological presentation of ataxia-telangiectasia within the same family.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare multisystem neurodegenerative genetic disorder due to mutation of ATM gene. The clinical expression and the immunological abnormalities are variable and apparently not associated with the type of ATM mutations. We report on two siblings affected by A-T with different clinical and immunological presentations; in particular in one the immunological phenotype was reminiscent of hyper IgM syndrome.

27181190
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T): An emerging dimension of premature ageing.
A-T is a prototype genome instability syndrome and a multifaceted disease. A-T leads to neurodegeneration - primarily cerebellar atrophy, immunodeficiency, oculocutaneous telangiectasia (dilated blood vessels), vestigial thymus and gonads, endocrine abnormalities, cancer predisposition and varying sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, particularly those that induce DNA double-strand breaks. With the recent increase in life expectancy of A-T patients, the premature ageing component of this disease is gaining greater awareness. The complex A-T phenotype reflects the ever growing number of functions assigned to the protein encoded by the responsible gene - the homeostatic protein kinase, ATM. The quest to thoroughly understand the complex A-T phenotype may reveal yet elusive ATM functions.

10422797
Ataxia-telangiectasia, cancer and the pathobiology of the ATM gene.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a pleiotropic inherited disease characterized by neurodegeneration, cancer, immunodeficiencies, radiation sensitivity, and genetic instability. Although A-T homozygotes are rare, the A-T gene may play a role in sporadic breast cancer and leukemia. ATM, the gene responsible for A-T, is homologous to several cell cycle checkpoint genes from other organisms. ATM is thought to play a crucial role in a signal transduction network that modulates cell cycle checkpoints, genetic recombination, apoptosis, and other cellular responses to DNA damage. New insights into the pathobiology of A-T have been provided by the creation of Atm-/- mice and by in vitro studies of ATM function. Analyses of ATM mutations in A-T patients and in sporadic tumors suggest the existence of two classes of ATM mutation: null mutations that lead to A-T and dominant negative missense mutations that may predispose to cancer in the heterozygous state.

18456574
The neurological phenotype of ataxia-telangiectasia: solving a persistent puzzle.
Human genomic instability syndromes affect the nervous system to different degrees of severity, attesting to the vulnerability of the CNS to perturbations of genomic integrity and the DNA damage response (DDR). Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a typical genomic instability syndrome whose major characteristic is progressive neuronal degeneration but is also associated with immunodeficiency, cancer predisposition and acute sensitivity to ionizing radiation and radiomimetic chemicals. A-T is caused by loss or inactivation of the ATM protein kinase, which mobilizes the complex, multi-branched cellular response to double strand breaks in the DNA by phosphorylating numerous DDR players. The link between ATM's function in the DDR and the neuronal demise in A-T has been questioned in the past. However, recent studies of the ATM-mediated DDR in neurons suggest that the neurological phenotype in A-T is indeed caused by deficiency in this function, similar to other features of the disease. Still, major issues concerning this phenotype remain open, including the presumed differences between the DDR in post-mitotic neurons and proliferating cells, the nature of the damage that accumulates in the DNA of ATM-deficient neurons under normal life conditions, the mode of death of ATM-deficient neurons, and the lack of a major neuronal phenotype in the mouse model of A-T. A-T remains a prototype disease for the study of the DDR's role in CNS development and maintenance.

16423518
[Ataxia-telangiectasia: a review].
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease caused by mutational inactivation of the ATM gene. It is a multisystemic disease, characterized by progressive neurological dysfunction, especially in the cerebellum, oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, recurrent sino-pulmonary infections and high incidence of neoplasms. The responsible gene, ATM, encodes a large protein that belongs to a family of protein kinases with a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (Pi3K) domain. ATM is a key regulator of cell cycle checkpoints that causes DNA repair or apoptosis. Several studies report ATM function in target cells (such as neurons, fibroblast, endothelium, germ cells, lymphocytes). The pleiotropic phenotypes of AT reflect the multifaceted activities of ATM protein. In nucleus (lymphocytes, fibroblasts, germ cells) ATM is involved in regulation of cell-cycle checkpoints; in cytoplasm ATM regulates redox state (neurons).

12631440
Oxidative stress in ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia is one of a group of recessive hereditary genomic instability disorders and is characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency and cancer susceptibility. Heterozygotes for the mutated gene are more susceptible to cancer and to ischaemic heart disease. The affected gene, ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated), has been cloned and codes for a protein kinase (ATM), which orchestrates the cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks after ionising radiation. An underlying feature of ataxia telangiectasia is oxidative stress and there is chronic activation of stress response pathways in tissues showing pathology such as the cerebellum, but not in the cerebrum or liver. ATM has also been shown to be activated by insulin and to have a wider role in signal transduction and cell growth. Many, but not all, aspects of the phenotype can be attributed to a defective DNA damage response. The oxidative stress may result directly from accumulated DNA damage in affected tissues or ATM may have an additional role in sensing/modulating redox homeostasis. The basis for the observed tissue specificity of the oxidative damage in ataxia telangiectasia is not clear.

18087222
ATM prevents unattended DNA double strand breaks on site and in generations to come.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a disorder characterized by cerebellar degeneration, immunodeficiency, genomic instability and genetic predisposition to lymphoid malignancies with translocations involving antigen receptor loci. The Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated gene encodes the ATM kinase, a central transducer of DNA damage signals. Until recently, the etiology of the lymphoid phenotype in A-T patients and the mechanisms by which ATM ensures normal repair of DNA double strand break (DSB) intermediates during antigen receptor diversification reactions remained poorly understood. Last year, Bredemeyer et al. (Nature 2006; 442:466-70) demonstrated that ATM stabilizes chromosomal V(D)J recombination DSB intermediates, facilitates DNA end joining and prevents broken DNA ends from participating in chromosome deletions, inversions and translocations. A more recent study by Callen et al. (Cell 2007; 130:63-75) highlighted the importance of ATM-mediated checkpoints in blocking the long-term persistence and transmission of un-repaired DSBs in developing lymphocytes. Collectively, these results have provided complementary mechanistic insights into ATM functions in V(D)J recombination that can account for the lymphoid tumor-prone phenotype associated with A-T.

20480175
Homozygosity for c 6325T>G transition in the ATM gene causes an atypical, late-onset variant form of ataxia-telangiectasia.


20608227
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) as a central regulator of radiation-induced DNA damage response.
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) is a DNA damage-inducible protein kinase, which phosphorylates plethora of substrates participating in DNA damage response. ATM significance for the cell faith is undeniable, since it regulates DNA repair, cell-cycle progress, and apoptosis. Here we describe its main signalling targets and discuss its importance in DNA repair as well as novel findings linked to this key regulatory enzyme in the terms of ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage.

21593342
Stable brain ATM message and residual kinase-active ATM protein in ataxia-telangiectasia.
The gene that is mutated in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), ATM, is catalytically activated in response to DNA damage. Yet a full accounting for the CNS deficits in human A-T or its mouse models remains elusive. We have analyzed the CNS phenotypes of two mouse Atm alleles--Atm(tm1Bal) (Bal) and Atm(tm1Awb) (Awb). Neither mutant has detectable mRNA or protein in peripheral tissues. In brain, although Bal/Bal mice have no ATM protein, they have nearly normal amounts of Atm mRNA. Bal/Bal neurons exhibit extensive cell cycle reentry and degeneration in both cortex and cerebellum. Unexpectedly, in Awb/Awb mice a novel mRNA is found in which the engineered mutation is excised. This mRNA is apparently translated and produces a catalytically active ATM protein that responds to DNA damage by phosphorylating p53 and Chk2. Prompted by these results, we examined eight cases of human A-T and found evidence for residual ATM protein in seven of them. These findings offer important new insights into the human disease and the role of brain ATM activity in the severity of the neurological symptoms of A-T.

15880721
ATM mutations, haplotype analysis, and immunological status of Russian patients with ataxia telangiectasia.
Mutations in the ATM gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive disorder, ataxia telangiectasia (A-T). Mutations in different ethnic groups are distributed along the entire length of the large, 66 exon ATM gene. In this study, A-T patients from 16 Russian families were assessed for immunological status and ATM haplotype analysis, and screened for ATM mutations. Haplotype analysis was performed to enhance the efficiency of mutation detection. Mutations predicted to cause disease were identified in 19 of 32 alleles (59%), including a truncating mutation (c.5932G>T) that was identified in 8/32 (25%) alleles both by haplotype analysis and mutation screening. This mutation has been found in low abundance in other European A-T cohorts suggesting that this founder-effect mutation may be of Russian origin. The abundance of this mutation may allow for large-scale screening of cancer patients to help clarify the role of ATM in breast and other cancers. Nine of the remaining mutations were previously unreported, and add to the multitude of unique mutations found throughout the gene.

10549596
ATM: the protein encoded by the gene mutated in the radiosensitive syndrome ataxia-telangiectasia.
PURPOSE: To provide an update on the product of the ATM gene mutated in the human genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). SUMMARY: The product of the ATM gene mutated in the human genetic disorder A-T is a 350 kDa protein that plays a central role in the regulation of a number of cellular processes. It is a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase superfamily, but is more likely a protein kinase similar to another member of that family, i.e. DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). A-T cells and fibroblasts derived from the atm -/- mouse are hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and defective in cell cycle checkpoint control. At present the nature of the lesion in damaged DNA recognized by ATM remains uncertain, but it is evident that a small number of residual strand breaks remain unrepaired in A-T cells, which may well account for the radiosensitivity. On the other hand, considerable progress has been achieved in delineating the role of ATM in cell cycle checkpoint control. Defects are observed at all cell cycle checkpoints in A-T cells post-irradiation. At the G1 /S interface ATM has been shown to play a central role in radiation-induced activation of the tumour suppressor gene product p53. ATM binds to p53 in a complex fashion and activates the molecule in response to breaks in DNA by phosphorylating it at serine 15 close to the N-terminus and by controlling other phosphorylation and dephosphorylation changes on the molecule. This in turn leads to the induction of p21/WAF1 and other p53 effector proteins before inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase activity and G1 arrest. Emerging evidence supports a direct role for ATM at other cell cycle checkpoints. Other proteins interacting with ATM include c-Abl a protein tyrosine kinase, beta-adaptin an endosomal protein and p21 a downstream effector of p53. The significance of these interactions is currently being investigated. ATM also plays an important role in the regulation and surveillance of meiotic progression. The localization of ATM to both the nucleus and other subcellular organelles implicates this molecule in a myriad of cellular processes. CONCLUSION: ATM is involved in DNA damage recognition and cell cycle control in response to ionizing radiation damage. There is evidence that ATM may also have a more general signalling role.

21665257
Morbidity and mortality from ataxia-telangiectasia are associated with ATM genotype.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare genetic disease caused by germline biallelic mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) that result in partial or complete loss of ATM expression or activity. The course of the disease is characterized by neurologic manifestations, infections, and cancers. OBJECTIVE: We studied A-T progression and investigated whether manifestations were associated with the ATM genotype. METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study in France of 240 patients with A-T born from 1954 to 2005 and analyzed ATM mutations in 184 patients, along with neurologic manifestations, infections, and cancers. RESULTS: Among patients with A-T, the Kaplan-Meier 20-year survival rate was 53.4%; the prognosis for these patients has not changed since 1954. Life expectancy was lower among patients with mutations in ATM that caused total loss of expression or function of the gene product (null mutations) compared with that seen in patients with hypomorphic mutations because of earlier onset of cancer (mainly hematologic malignancies). Cancer (hazard ratio, 2.7; 95% CI, 1.6-4.5) and respiratory tract infections (hazard ratio, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.4-3.8) were independently associated with mortality. Cancer (hazard ratio, 5.8; 95% CI, 2.9-11.6) was a major risk factor for mortality among patients with null mutations, whereas respiratory tract infections (hazard ratio, 4.1; 95% CI, 1.8-9.1) were the leading cause of death among patients with hypomorphic mutations. CONCLUSION: Morbidity and mortality among patients with A-T are associated with ATM genotype. This information could improve our prognostic ability and lead to adapted therapeutic strategies.

23264026
Newborn screening for SCID identifies patients with ataxia telangiectasia.
PURPOSE: Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is characterized by failure of T lymphocyte development and absent or very low T cell receptor excision circles (TRECs), DNA byproducts of T cell maturation. Newborn screening for TRECs to identify SCID is now performed in several states using PCR of DNA from universally collected dried blood spots (DBS). In addition to infants with typical SCID, TREC screening identifies infants with T lymphocytopenia who appear healthy and in whom a SCID diagnosis cannot be confirmed. Deep sequencing was employed to find causes of T lymphocytopenia in such infants. METHODS: Whole exome sequencing and analysis were performed in infants and their parents. Upon finding deleterious mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, we confirmed the diagnosis of ataxia telangiectasia (AT) in two infants and then tested archival newborn DBS of additional AT patients for TREC copy number. RESULTS: Exome sequencing and analysis led to 2 unsuspected gene diagnoses of AT. Of 13 older AT patients for whom newborn DBS had been stored, 7 samples tested positive for SCID under the criteria of California's newborn screening program. AT children with low neonatal TRECs had low CD4 T cell counts subsequently detected (R=0.64). CONCLUSIONS: T lymphocytopenia in newborns can be a feature of AT, as revealed by TREC screening and exome sequencing. Although there is no current cure for the progressive neurological impairment of AT, early detection permits avoidance of infectious complications, while providing information for families regarding reproductive recurrence risks and increased cancer risks in patients and carriers.

23142947
Novel mutation in the ATM gene in a Malian family with ataxia telangiectasia.


10802669
ATM-dependent phosphorylation of nibrin in response to radiation exposure.
Mutations in the gene ATM are responsible for the genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is characterized by cerebellar dysfunction, radiosensitivity, chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition. Both the A-T phenotype and the similarity of the ATM protein to other DNA-damage sensors suggests a role for ATM in biochemical pathways involved in the recognition, signalling and repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). There are strong parallels between the pattern of radiosensitivity, chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition in A-T patients and that in patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS). The protein defective in NBS, nibrin (encoded by NBS1), forms a complex with MRE11 and RAD50 (refs 1,2). This complex localizes to DSBs within 30 minutes after cellular exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) and is observed in brightly staining nuclear foci after a longer period of time. The overlap between clinical and cellular phenotypes in A-T and NBS suggests that ATM and nibrin may function in the same biochemical pathway. Here we demonstrate that nibrin is phosphorylated within one hour of treatment of cells with IR. This response is abrogated in A-T cells that either do not express ATM protein or express near full-length mutant protein. We also show that ATM physically interacts with and phosphorylates nibrin on serine 343 both in vivo and in vitro. Phosphorylation of this site appears to be functionally important because mutated nibrin (S343A) does not completely complement radiosensitivity in NBS cells. ATM phosphorylation of nibrin does not affect nibrin-MRE11-RAD50 association as revealed by radiation-induced foci formation. Our data provide a biochemical explanation for the similarity in phenotype between A-T and NBS.

11429421
Ataxia telangiectasia gene mutations in leukaemia and lymphoma.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare multisystem, autosomal, recessive disease characterised by neuronal degeneration, genome instability, and an increased risk of cancer. Approximately 10% of AT homozygotes develop cancer, mostly of the lymphoid system. Lymphoid malignancies in patients with AT are of both B cell and T cell origin, and include Hodgkin's lymphoma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and several forms of leukaemia. The AT locus was mapped to the chromosomal region 11q22-23 using genetic linkage analysis in the late 1980s and the causative gene was identified by positional cloning several years later. The ATM gene encodes a large protein that belongs to a family of kinases possessing a highly conserved C-terminal kinase domain related to the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase domain. Members of this kinase family have been shown to function in DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint control following DNA damage. Recent studies indicate that ATM is activated primarily in response to double strand breaks and may be considered a caretaker of the genome. Most mutations in ATM result in truncation and destabilisation of the protein, but certain missense and splicing errors have been shown to produce a less severe phenotype. AT heterozygotes have a slightly increased risk of breast cancer. Atm deficient mice exhibit many of the symptoms found in patients with AT and have a high frequency of thymic lymphoma. The association between mutation of the ATM gene and a high incidence of lymphoid malignancy in patients with AT, together with the development of lymphoma in Atm deficient mice, supports the proposal that inactivation of the ATM gene may be of importance in the pathogenesis of sporadic lymphoid malignancy. Loss of heterozygosity at 11q22-23 (the location of the ATM gene) is a common event in lymphoid malignancy. Frequent inactivating mutations of the ATM gene have been reported in patients with rare sporadic T cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL), B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL), and most recently, mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). In contrast to the ATM mutation pattern in AT, the most frequent nucleotide changes in these sporadic lymphoid malignancies were missense mutations. The presence of inactivating mutations, together with the deletion of the normal copy of the ATM gene in some patients with T-PLL, B-CLL, and MCL, establishes somatic inactivation of the ATM gene in the pathogenesis of lymphoid malignancies, and strongly suggests that ATM functions as a tumour suppressor. The presence of missense mutations in the germline of patients with B-CLL has been reported, suggesting that some patients with B-CLL may be constitutional AT heterozygotes. The putative hereditary predisposition of B-CLL, although intriguing, warrants further investigation.

23100326
Bone marrow transplantation improves the outcome of Atm-deficient mice through the migration of ATM-competent cells.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a highly pleiotropic disorder. Patients suffer from progressive neurodegeneration, severe bronchial complications, immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity to radiotherapy and elevated risk of malignancies. Leukemia and lymphoma, along with lung failure, are the main causes of morbidity and mortality in A-T patients. At present, no effective therapy for A-T exists. One promising therapeutic approach is bone marrow transplantation (BMT) that is already used as a curative therapy for other genomic instability syndromes. We used an established clinically relevant non-myeloablative host-conditioning regimen and transplanted green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-competent bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) into Atm-deficient mice. GFP expression allowed tracking of the potential migration of the cells into the tissues of recipient animals. Donor BMDCs migrated into the bone marrow, blood, thymus, spleen and lung tissue of Atm-deficient mice showing an ATM-competent phenotype. BMT inhibited thymic lymphomas, normalized T-lymphocyte populations, improved weight gain and rearing activity of Atm-deficient mice. In contrast, no GFP(+) cells were found in the cerebellum or cerebrum, and we detected decreased size index in MRI imaging of the cerebellum in 8-month-old transplanted Atm-deficient mice in comparison to wild-type mice. The repopulation with ATM-competent BMDCs is associated with a prolonged lifespan and significantly improved the phenotype of Atm-deficient mice.

25040471
Ataxia telangiectasia: more variation at clinical and cellular levels.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare recessively inherited disorder resulting in a progressive neurological decline. It is caused by biallelic mutation of the ATM gene that encodes a 370 kDa serine/threonine protein kinase responsible for phosphorylating many target proteins. ATM is activated by auto(trans)phosphorylation in response to DNA double strand breaks and leads to the activation of cell cycle checkpoints and either DNA repair or apoptosis as part of the cellular response to DNA damage. The allelic heterogeneity in A-T is striking. While the majority of mutations are truncating, leading to instability and loss of the ATM protein from the allele, a significant proportion of patients carry one of a small number of mutations that are either missense or leaky splice site mutations resulting in retention of some ATM with activity. The allelic heterogeneity in ATM, therefore, results in an equally striking clinical heterogeneity. There is also locus heterogeneity because mutation of the MRE11 gene can cause an obvious A-T like disorder both clinically and also at the cellular level and mutation of the RNF168 gene results in a much milder clinical phenotype, neurologically, with the major clinical feature being an immunological defect.

15928302
Cancer risks and mortality in heterozygous ATM mutation carriers.
BACKGROUND: Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ATM gene are the principal cause of ataxia telangiectasia (A-T). Several studies have suggested that heterozygous carriers of ATM mutations are at increased risk of breast cancer and perhaps of other cancers, but the precise risk is uncertain. METHODS: Cancer incidence and mortality information for 1160 relatives of 169 UK A-T patients (including 247 obligate carriers) was obtained through the National Health Service Central Registry. Relative risks (RRs) of cancer in carriers, allowing for genotype uncertainty, were estimated with a maximum-likelihood approach that used the EM algorithm. Maximum-likelihood estimates of cancer risks associated with three groups of mutations were calculated using the pedigree analysis program MENDEL. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: The overall relative risk of breast cancer in carriers was 2.23 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.16 to 4.28) compared with the general population but was 4.94 (95% CI = 1.90 to 12.9) in those younger than age 50 years. The relative risk for all cancers other than breast cancer was 2.05 (95% CI = 1.09 to 3.84) in female carriers and 1.23 (95% CI = 0.76 to 2.00) in male carriers. Breast cancer was the only site for which a clear risk increase was seen, although there was some evidence of excess risks of colorectal cancer (RR = 2.54, 95% CI = 1.06 to 6.09) and stomach cancer (RR = 3.39, 95% CI = 0.86 to 13.4). Carriers of mutations predicted to encode a full-length ATM protein had cancer risks similar to those of people carrying truncating mutations. CONCLUSION: These results confirm a moderate risk of breast cancer in A-T heterozygotes and give some evidence of an excess risk of other cancers but provide no support for large mutation-specific differences in risk.

18083591
Ophthalmic features of ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder.
INTRODUCTION: Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a recessive neurodegenerative disease due to a faulty repair mechanism for breaks in double-stranded DNA (ATM mutation). Ophthalmic features of AT include conjunctival telangiectasia, strabismus, saccadic dysfunction with head thrusts, and convergence insufficiency. Ataxia telangiectasia-like syndrome (ATLD) is a more recently recognized condition due to homozygous mutation in MRE11, a gene also involved in the cellular repair response to double-stranded DNA breaks; ophthalmic features of ATLD are not well described. The purpose of this article is to describe the ophthalmic features of ATLD. METHODS: Full ophthalmologic and orthoptic evaluations were obtained in 13 individuals: 10 previously reported ATLD patients, an additional related ATLD patient, and 3 nonaffected relatives. All individuals were from three unrelated consanguineous Saudi Arabian families harboring an MRE11 mutation (W210C). Age range was from 2 to 40 years of age. RESULTS: No affected patient had structural ocular abnormality (eg, conjunctival telangiectasia), manifest strabismus at distance, or duction limitation. All but one (the youngest) had saccadic dysfunction (without head thrusts). Most patients had abnormal convergence. Older patients had nystagmus with abnormalities in smooth pursuit and vestibular ocular reflex. All patients had cerebellar atrophy by neuroimaging and slowly progressive ataxia. The unaffected heterozygous relatives had unremarkable ophthalmic and neurologic examinations. CONCLUSIONS: Saccadic dysfunction without head thrusts and convergence abnormality are common in ATLD secondary to homozygous W210C MRE11 mutation. Older patients have nystagmus with abnormalities in smooth pursuit and vestibular ocular reflex. Eye movement control systems apparently deteriorate with time in this rare neurological disease. Ophthalmic features of AT that were not observed in any of our ATLD patients include conjunctival telangiectasia, head thrusting, and manifest strabismus at distance.

16799570
ATM stabilizes DNA double-strand-break complexes during V(D)J recombination.
The ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) protein kinase mediates early cellular responses to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) generated during metabolic processes or by DNA-damaging agents. ATM deficiency leads to ataxia-telangiectasia, a disease marked by lymphopenia, genomic instability and an increased predisposition to lymphoid malignancies with chromosomal translocations involving lymphocyte antigen receptor loci. ATM activates cell-cycle checkpoints and can induce apoptosis in response to DNA DSBs. However, defects in these pathways of the DNA damage response cannot fully account for the phenotypes of ATM deficiency. Here, we show that ATM also functions directly in the repair of chromosomal DNA DSBs by maintaining DNA ends in repair complexes generated during lymphocyte antigen receptor gene assembly. When coupled with the cell-cycle checkpoint and pro-apoptotic activities of ATM, these findings provide a molecular explanation for the increase in lymphoid tumours with translocations involving antigen receptor loci associated with ataxia-telangiectasia.

14654357
Improved diagnostic testing for ataxia-telangiectasia by immunoblotting of nuclear lysates for ATM protein expression.
The laboratory diagnosis of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) currently relies upon measurement of serum alphafetoprotein (AFP) and cellular sensitivity to ionizing radiation. A previous report suggests that immunoblotting of whole cell lysates from lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) might be informative for diagnosis. To further evaluate this possibility, and improve sensitivity, we performed immunoblotting for ATM protein on nuclear lysates of 71 consecutive radiosensitive LCLs that were established from patients with clinical features suggestive of A-T. Fifty-two LCLs (73%) contained no detectable ATM protein, with a representative sample (N=25) testing negative for ATM kinase activity, having at least one ATM mutation, and having elevated AFP levels; these results confirmed the diagnosis. Seventeen LCLs (24%) expressed intermediate or normal levels of ATM protein and exhibited normal ATM kinase activity; follow-up studies failed to detect ATM mutations and AFP levels were normal in all but three. Of the remaining two radiosensitive LCLs, one had 35% of normal protein with normal kinase activity and no ATM mutations. The other LCL had 9% of normal protein, with intermediate levels of kinase activity, a homozygous missense ATM mutation, and elevated AFP. Our data suggest that it is very uncommon to encounter bonafide A-T patients with more than trace amounts of ATM protein. We conclude that immunoblotting for ATM protein is of higher specificity for diagnosing A-T than radiosensitivity testing. In addition, we have documented in vitro radiosensitivity in other patients who share some clinical features with A-T.

17028372
Ataxia-telangiectasia and related diseases.
Appropriate cellular signaling responses to DNA damage and the ability to repair DNA are fundamental processes that are required for organismal survival. Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare neurodegenerative disease that results from defective DNA damage signaling. Understanding the molecular basis of A-T has provided many critical insights into the cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). A-T is a syndrome that shows pronounced neurodegeneration of the nervous system coincident with immune deficiency, radiosensitivity, and cancer proneness. A-T results from inactivation of the A-T mutated (ATM) kinase, a critical protein kinase that regulates the response to DNA-DSBs by selective phosphorylation of a variety of substrates. Therefore, understanding the ATM signaling program has important biological ramifications for nervous system homeostasis. Underscoring the importance of the DNA-DSBs response in the nervous system are other diseases related to A-T that also result from defects in this signaling pathway. In particular, defects in the DNA damage sensor, the Mre11-RAD50-NBS1 complex, also lead to syndromes with neurological deficits and overlapping phenotypes to A-T. Collectively, these diseases highlight the critical importance of appropriate responses to DNA-DSBs to maintain homeostasis in the nervous system.

21765465
Absence of Wip1 partially rescues Atm deficiency phenotypes in mice.
Wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (WIP1) is a serine/threonine phosphatase that dephosphorylates proteins in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-initiated DNA damage response pathway. WIP1 may have a homeostatic role in ATM signaling by returning the cell to a normal pre-stress state following completion of DNA repair. To better understand the effects of WIP1 on ATM signaling, we crossed Atm-deficient mice to Wip1-deficient mice and characterized phenotypes of the double knockout progeny. We hypothesized that the absence of Wip1 might rescue Atm deficiency phenotypes. Atm null mice, like ATM-deficient humans with the inherited syndrome ataxia telangiectasia, exhibit radiation sensitivity, fertility defects, and are T-cell lymphoma prone. Most double knockout mice were largely protected from lymphoma development and had a greatly extended lifespan compared with Atm null mice. Double knockout mice had increased p53 and H2AX phosphorylation and p21 expression compared with their Atm null counterparts, indicating enhanced p53 and DNA damage responses. Additionally, double knockout splenocytes displayed reduced chromosomal instability compared with Atm null mice. Finally, doubly null mice were partially rescued from gametogenesis defects observed in Atm null mice. These results indicate that inhibition of WIP1 may represent a useful strategy for cancer treatment in general and A-T patients in particular.

9463314
ATM mutations and phenotypes in ataxia-telangiectasia families in the British Isles: expression of mutant ATM and the risk of leukemia, lymphoma, and breast cancer.
We report the spectrum of 59 ATM mutations observed in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients in the British Isles. Of 51 ATM mutations identified in families native to the British Isles, 11 were founder mutations, and 2 of these 11 conferred a milder clinical phenotype with respect to both cerebellar degeneration and cellular features. We report, in two A-T families, an ATM mutation (7271T-->G) that may be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in both homozygotes and heterozygotes (relative risk 12.7; P=. 0025), although there is a less severe A-T phenotype in terms of the degree of cerebellar degeneration. This mutation (7271T-->G) also allows expression of full-length ATM protein at a level comparable with that in unaffected individuals. In addition, we have studied 18 A-T patients, in 15 families, who developed leukemia, lymphoma, preleukemic T-cell proliferation, or Hodgkin lymphoma, mostly in childhood. A wide variety of ATM mutation types, including missense mutations and in-frame deletions, were seen in these patients. We also show that 25% of all A-T patients carried in-frame deletions or missense mutations, many of which were also associated with expression of mutant ATM protein.

15039971
Five haplotypes account for fifty-five percent of ATM mutations in Brazilian patients with ataxia telangiectasia: seven new mutations.
We have studied the molecular genetics of 27 Brazilian families with ataxia telangiectasia (AT). Five founder effect haplotypes accounted for 55.5% of the families. AT is an autosomal recessive disorder of childhood onset characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular apraxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, radiation sensitivity, chromosomal instability, and predisposition to cancer. The ATM gene spans more than 150 kb on chromosome region 11q23.1 and encodes a product of 3056 amino acids. The ATM protein is a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K) family of proteins and is involved in cell cycle control and DNA repair pathways. DNA was isolated from lymphoblastoid cell lines and haplotyped using four STR markers (D11S1818, NS22, D11S2179, D11S1819) within and flanking the ATM gene; all allele sizes were standardized in advance. In addition to the STR haplotypes, SNP haplotypes were determined using 10 critical polymorphisms. The entire gene was screened sequentially by protein truncation testing (PTT), single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), and then denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) to identify the disease-causing mutations. Of the expected 54 mutations, 50 were identified. All mutations but one, led to a truncated or null form of the ATM protein (nonsense, splice site, or frameshift). Five families (18.5%) carried a deletion of 3450nt (from IVS28 to Ex31), making this one of the two most common Brazilian mutations. Mutations were located throughout the entire gene, with no clustering or hotspots. Standardized STR haplotype analysis greatly enhanced the efficiency of mutation screening.

26310626
A novel mouse model for ataxia-telangiectasia with a N-terminal mutation displays a behavioral defect and a low incidence of lymphoma but no increased oxidative burden.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Significant heterogeneity exists in the underlying genetic mutations and clinical phenotypes. A number of mouse models have been generated that harbor mutations in the distal region of the gene, and a recent study suggests the presence of residual ATM protein in the brain of one such model. These mice recapitulate many of the characteristics of A-T seen in humans, with the notable exception of neurodegeneration. In order to study how an N-terminal mutation affects the disease phenotype, we generated an inducible Atm mutant mouse model (Atm(tm1Mmpl/tm1Mmpl), referred to as A-T [M]) predicted to express only the first 62 amino acids of Atm. Cells derived from A-T [M] mutant mice exhibited reduced cellular proliferation and an altered DNA damage response, but surprisingly, showed no evidence of an oxidative imbalance. Examination of the A-T [M] animals revealed an altered immunophenotype consistent with A-T. In contrast to mice harboring C-terminal Atm mutations that disproportionately develop thymic lymphomas, A-T [M] mice developed lymphoma at a similar rate as human A-T patients. Morphological analyses of A-T [M] cerebella revealed no substantial cellular defects, similar to other models of A-T, although mice display behavioral defects consistent with cerebellar dysfunction. Overall, these results suggest that loss of Atm is not necessarily associated with an oxidized phenotype as has been previously proposed and that loss of ATM protein is not sufficient to induce cerebellar degeneration in mice.

15269180
MRE11 mutations and impaired ATM-dependent responses in an Italian family with ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder.
Hypomorphic mutations of the MRE11 gene are the hallmark of the radiosensitive ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD). Here, we describe a new family with two affected siblings, ATLD5 and ATLD6, now aged 37 and 36, respectively. They presented with late onset cerebellar degeneration slowly progressing until puberty and absence of telangiectasias, and were cancer-free. Both patients were wild-type for ATM and NBS1, but compound heterozygotes for MRE11 gene mutations [1422C-->A, T481K; 1714C-->T, R571X]. The 1422C-->A allele was inherited from the mother, whereas the 1714C-->T, allele paternally inherited, was apparently null as a result of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Interestingly, the 1714C-->T mutation is the same as previously identified in an unrelated English ATLD family (probands ATLD3 and ATLD4), suggesting an important role for NMD in saving potentially lethal mutations. Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from ATLD5 and ATLD6 were normal for ATM, but defective for Mre11, Rad50 and Nbs1 (the MRN complex) protein expression. Their response to gamma-radiation was abnormal, as evidenced by the enhanced radiosensitivity, attenuated autophosphorylation of ATM-S1981 and phosphorylation of the ATM targets p53-S15 and Smc1-S966, failure to form Mre11 nuclear foci and defective G1 checkpoint arrest. The fibroblasts, but not LCLs, from ATLD5 and ATLD6 showed an impaired ATM-dependent Chk2 phosphorylation. These findings further underscore the interconnection between ATM activity and MRN function, which rationalizes the clinical similarity between ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) and ATLD.

17077325
ATM deficiency disrupts Tcra locus integrity and the maturation of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes.
Mutations in ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) cause ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), a disease characterized by neurodegeneration, sterility, immunodeficiency, and T-cell leukemia. Defective ATM-mediated DNA damage responses underlie many aspects of the AT syndrome, but the basis for the immune deficiency has not been defined. ATM associates with DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), and some evidence suggests that ATM may regulate V(D)J recombination. However, it remains unclear how ATM loss compromises lymphocyte development in vivo. Here, we show that T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta)-dependent proliferation and production of TCRbeta(low) CD4+CD8+ (DP) thymocytes occurred normally in Atm-/- mice. In striking contrast, the postmitotic maturation of TCRbeta(low) DP precursors into TCRbeta(int) DP cells and TCRbeta(hi) mature thymocytes was profoundly impaired. Furthermore, Atm-/- thymocytes expressed abnormally low amounts of TCRalpha mRNA and protein. These defects were not attributable to the induction of a BCL-2-sensitive apoptotic pathway. Rather, they were associated with frequent biallelic loss of distal Va gene segments in DP thymocytes, revealing that ATM maintains Tcra locus integrity as it undergoes V(D)J recombination. Collectively, our data demonstrate that ATM loss increases the frequency of aberrant Tcra deletion events, which compromise DP thymocyte maturation and likely promote the generation of oncogenic TCR translocations.

30685876
Ataxia-telangiectasia: A review of clinical features and molecular pathology.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive primary immunodeficiency (PID) disease that is caused by mutations in ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encoding a serine/threonine protein kinase. A-T patients represent a broad range of clinical manifestations including progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, variable immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, susceptibility to malignancies, and increased metabolic diseases. This congenital disorder has phenotypic heterogeneity, and the severity of symptoms varies in different patients based on severity of mutations and disease progression. The principal role of nuclear ATM is the coordination of cellular signaling pathways in response to DNA double-strand breaks, oxidative stress, and cell cycle checkpoint. The pathogenesis of A-T is not limited to the role of ATM in the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway, and it has other functions mainly in the hematopoietic cells and neurons. ATM adjusts the functions of organelles such as mitochondria and peroxisomes and also regulates angiogenesis and glucose metabolisms. However, ATM has other functions in the cells (especially cell viability) that need further investigations. In this review, we described functions of ATM in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and also its association with some disorder formation such as neurologic, immunologic, vascular, pulmonary, metabolic, and dermatologic complications.

9259193
Diversity of ATM gene mutations detected in patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, which is mutated in the autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), was isolated in 1995 by positional cloning. Although in vitro cell fusion studies had suggested that AT was genetically heterogeneous, all AT patients studied to date have been found to harbor mutations in the ATM gene. More that 100 ATM mutations occurring in AT patients have been documented. The mutations are broadly distributed throughout the ATM gene. Except for patients from families with known consanguinity, most AT patients are compound heterozygotes. The majority (> 70%) of mutations are predicted to lead to protein truncation. A significant number of the reported mutations affect mRNA splicing with at least half of the coding exons (32/62) having been observed to undergo exon skipping. The large size of the ATM gene, 66 exons spanning approximately 150 kb of genomic DNA, together with the diversity and broad distribution of mutations in AT patients greatly limits the utility of direct mutation screening as a diagnostic tool, or method of carrier identification, except where founder effect mutations are involved.

22035194
ATM and the molecular pathogenesis of ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) results from inactivation of the ATM protein kinase. DNA-damage signaling is a prime function of this kinase, although other roles have been ascribed to ATM. Identifying the primary ATM function(s) for tissue homeostasis is key to understanding how these functions contribute to the prevention of A-T-related pathology. In this regard, because A-T is primarily a neurodegenerative disease, it is essential to understand how ATM loss results in degenerative effects on the nervous system. In addition to delineating the biochemistry and cell biology of ATM, important insights into the molecular basis for neurodegeneration in A-T come from a spectrum of phenotypically related neurodegenerative diseases that directly result from DNA-repair deficiency. Together with A-T, these syndromes indicate that neurodegeneration can be caused by the failure to appropriately respond to DNA damage. This review focuses on defective DNA-damage signaling as the underlying cause of A-T.

16855104
Analysis of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated-mediated DNA damage response in murine cerebellar neurons.
The DNA damage response is a network of signaling pathways that affects many aspects of cellular metabolism after the induction of DNA damage. The primary transducer of the cellular response to the double-strand break, a highly cytotoxic DNA lesion, is the nuclear protein kinase ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) mutated (ATM), which phosphorylates numerous effectors that play key roles in the damage response pathways. Loss or inactivation of ATM leads to A-T, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neuronal degeneration, particularly the loss of cerebellar granule and Purkinje cells, immunodeficiency, genomic instability, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. The reason for the cerebellar degeneration in A-T is not clear. It has been ascribed by several investigators to cytoplasmic functions of ATM that may not be relevant to the DNA damage response. We set out to examine the subcellular localization of ATM and characterize the ATM-mediated damage response in mouse cerebellar neurons. We found that ATM is essentially nuclear in these cells and that various readouts of the ATM-mediated damage response are similar to those seen in commonly used cell lines. These include the autophosphorylation of ATM, which marks its activation, and phosphorylation of several of its downstream substrates. Importantly, all of these responses are detected in the nuclei of granule and Purkinje cells, suggesting that nuclear ATM functions in these cells similar to other cell types. These results support the notion that the cerebellar degeneration in A-T patients results from defective DNA damage response.

17341604
Ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated-dependent activation of Ku in human fibroblasts exposed to hydrogen peroxide.
DNA is damaged in cells during cell replication, by infection, or by various environmental stresses. The damaged cells stop cell cycle, repair damaged DNA, and when repaired progress into the next cell cycle stage. But when the attempt to repair the damage fails, the cells undergo apoptosis. The most deleterious damage of all is double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs), where ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated) serves as a sensor. The ATM pathway culminates in DNA repair through nonhomologous end-joining or through homologous recombination. Upon DNA damage, the DNA repair protein Ku70/80 translocates into the nucleus, which may be mediated by ATM. Previously, we found that pancreatic acinar cells undergo apoptosis upon oxidative stress, and the cell death stems from nuclear loss of Ku70/80. This study aims to investigate whether ATM has a role in Ku activation and prevention of cell death induced by oxidative stress (hydrogen peroxide) using A-T fibroblasts stably transfected with human full-length ATM cDNA or empty vector. As a result, hydrogen peroxide-induced cell death was augmented in A-T cells transfected with empty vector while cell death was prevented in A-T fibroblasts stably transfected with human full-length ATM cDNA. Ku DNA-binding activity induced by hydrogen peroxide treatment was increased in the A-T fibroblasts stably transfected with human full-length ATM cDNA compared to that in A-T cells transfected with empty vector. The results suggest that ATM may be essential for Ku activation to repair DNA damage from oxidative stress and prevent cell death caused by oxidative stress.

10873394
Ataxia-telangiectasia: phenotype/genotype studies of ATM protein expression, mutations, and radiosensitivity.
Previous studies on a limited number of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) patients with detectable levels of intracellular ATM protein have suggested a genotype/phenotype correlation. We sought to elucidate this possible correlation by comparing ATM protein levels with mutation types, radiosensitivity, and clinical phenotype. In this study, Western blot analysis was used to measure ATM protein in lysates of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from 123 unrelated A-T patients, 10 A-T heterozygotes, and 10 patients with phenotypes similar to A-T. Our Western blot protocol can detect the presence of ATM protein in as little as 1 microg of total protein; at least 25 microg of protein was tested for each individual. ATM protein was absent in 105 of the 123 patients (85%); most of these patients had truncating mutations. The remaining subset of 18 patients (15%) had reduced levels of normal-sized ATM protein; missense mutations were more common in this subset. We used a colony survival assay to characterize the phenotypic response of the LCLs to radiation exposure; patients with or without detectable ATM protein were typically radiosensitive. Nine of 10 A-T heterozygotes also had reduced expression of ATM, indicating that both alleles contribute to ATM protein production. These data suggest that although ATM-specific mRNA is abundant in A-T cells, the abnormal ATM protein is unstable and is quickly targeted for degradation. We found little correlation between level of ATM protein and the type of underlying mutation, the clinical phenotype, or the radiophenotype.

16953663
Levels of gamma-H2AX Foci after low-dose-rate irradiation reveal a DNA DSB rejoining defect in cells from human ATM heterozygotes in two at families and in another apparently normal individual.
We have investigated the use of the gamma-H2AX assay, reflecting the presence of DNA double-strand breaks, as a possible means for identifying individuals who are mildly hypersensitive to ionizing radiation, such as some ATM heterozygotes. We compared levels of gamma-H2AX foci after irradiation in cells from six apparently normal individuals as well as from individuals from two separate AT families including the proband, mother, father and three unaffected siblings in each family. After a 1-Gy single acute (high-dose-rate) gamma-ray dose delivered to noncycling contact-inhibited monolayers of cells, clear differences were seen between samples from normal individuals (ATM(+/+)) and probands (ATM(-/-)) at nearly all sampling times after irradiation, but no clear distinctions were seen for cells from normal compared to obligate heterozygotes (ATM(+/-)). In contrast, after 24 h of continuous irradiation at a dose rate of 10 cGy/h, appreciable differences in numbers of foci per cell were observed for cells from individuals for all the known ATM genotypes compared with controls. Four unaffected siblings had mean numbers of foci per cell similar to that for the obligate heterozygotes, whereas the other two had mean values similar to that for normal controls. We determined independently that those siblings with mean numbers of foci per cell in the range of ATM heterozygotes carried the mutant allele, while both siblings with a normal number of foci per cell after irradiation had normal alleles. A more limited set of experiments using lymphoblastoid cell strains in the low-dose-rate assay also revealed distinct differences for normal compared to ATM heterozygotes from the same families and opens the possibility of using peripheral blood lymphocytes as a more suitable material for an assay to detect mild hypersensitivities to radiation among individuals.

19799357
[Syndrome of premature ageing in ataxia-telangiectasia patients].
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT), a genetic disorder due to mutation of gene atm characterized by progressive neurological abnormalities in combination with oculocutaneous telangiectasias, immunodeficiency, and increased frequency of malignant formations, is inherited according to autosome recessive mechanism. Cells of the patients with AT show increased radio sensitivity and some markers of premature ageing. The telomere lengths are sharply shortened in these cells already from the birth. We studied radio sensitivity (at the dose 2 Gy) and manifestations of premature ageing markers in cultured skin fibroblasts obtained from two unrelated AT patients and their heterozygous parents. We have shown that all the markers studied, that is HP1-gamma, phosphorylation of the histone variant H2AX (gamma-H2AX), and focuses 53BP1, indicate premature ageing of both the patients' and their blood relatives' cells. However, cells of the heterozygous carriers express premature ageing to a less extent. Investigation of the repair process characteristics (the amount of gamma-H2AX and the deal of cells with focuses 53BP1 in their nuclei) after X-ray irradiation has given following results: the patients' cells complete repair only half even in 24 after irradiation, while the healthy donor's cells complete repair in 24 h. Heterozygous cells also reliably differ from healthy donor's cells. Only in the case of apoptosis marker, p21, heterozygous cells do not differ from normal cells, whereas the patients' cells differ significantly. It has been noted that the mutation of gene atm is related to suppression of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) repair systems, which, in its turn, is in accordance with the increased radio sensitivity and premature ageing at the cell level in the AT families.

11665719
ATM: genome stability, neuronal development, and cancer cross paths.
One of the cornerstones of the web of signaling pathways governing cellular life and differentiation is the DNA damage response. It spans a complex network of pathways, ranging from DNA repair to modulation of numerous processes in the cell. DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), which are formed as a result of genotoxic stress or normal recombinational processes, are extremely lethal lesions that rapidly mobilize this intricate defense system. The master controller that pilots cellular responses to DSBs is the ATM protein kinase, which turns on this network by phosphorylating key players in its various branches. ATM is the protein product of the gene mutated in the human genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), which is characterized by neuronal degeneration, immunodeficiency, sterility, genomic instability, cancer predisposition, and radiation sensitivity. The clinical and cellular phenotype of A-T attests to the numerous roles of ATM, on the one hand, and to the link between the DNA damage response and developmental processes on the other hand. Recent studies of this protein and its effectors, combined with a thorough investigation of animal models of A-T, have led to new insights into the mode of action of this master controller of the DNA damage response. The evidence that ATM is involved in signaling pathways other than those related to damage response, particularly ones relating to cellular growth and differentiation, reinforces the multifaceted nature of this protein, in which genome stability, developmental processes, and cancer cross paths.

16906133
Autophosphorylation at serine 1987 is dispensable for murine Atm activation in vivo.
The ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) protein kinase is activated under physiological and pathological conditions that induce DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Loss of ATM or failure of its activation in humans and mice lead to defective cellular responses to DSBs, such as cell cycle checkpoints, radiation sensitivity, immune dysfunction, infertility and cancer predisposition. A widely used biological marker to identify the active form of ATM is the autophosphorylation of ATM at a single, conserved serine residue (Ser 1981 in humans; Ser 1987 in mouse). Here we show that Atm-dependent responses are functional at the organismal and cellular level in mice that express a mutant form of Atm (mutation of Ser to Ala at position 1987) as their sole Atm species. Moreover, the mutant protein does not exhibit dominant-negative interfering activity when expressed physiologically or overexpressed in the context of Atm heterozygous mice. These results suggest an alternative mode for stimulation of Atm by DSBs in which Atm autophosphorylation at Ser 1987, like trans-phosphorylation of downstream substrates, is a consequence rather than a cause of Atm activation.

17881893
The NBS1-ATM connection revisited.
Nijmegen Breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by microcephaly, immunodeficiency, and increased predisposition to the development of malignancy. Due to the overlap of clinical and cellular features of patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT), NBS was described as an AT variant syndrome until the underlying gene product mutation was identified. Cells from both AT and NBS patients show increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR), genomic instability and cell cycle checkpoint defects following DNA damage, suggesting that both gene products participate in the same DNA damage response pathway. Here we highlight recent developments and refinements in our understanding of the interplay between NBS1 and ATM in vivo.

9143686
The genetic defect in ataxia-telangiectasia.
The autosomal recessive human disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) was first described as a separate disease entity 40 years ago. It is a multisystem disease characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, radiosensitivity, predisposition to lymphoid malignancies and immunodeficiency, with defects in both cellular and humoral immunity. The pleiotropic nature of the clinical and cellular phenotype suggests that the gene product involved is important in maintaining stability of the genome but also plays a more general role in signal transduction. The chromosomal instability and radiosensitivity so characteristic of this disease appear to be related to defective activation of cell cycle checkpoints. Greater insight into the nature of the defect in A-T has been provided by the recent identification, by positional cloning, of the responsible gene, ATM. The ATM gene is related to a family of genes involved in cellular responses to DNA damage and/or cell cycle control. These genes encode large proteins containing a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase domain, some of which have protein kinase activity. The mutations causing A-T completely inactivate or eliminate the ATM protein. This protein has been detected and localized to different subcellular compartments.

19691550
Founder effects for ATM gene mutations in Italian Ataxia Telangiectasia families.
We screened ATM gene mutations in 104 Italian Ataxia-Telangiectasia patients from 91 unrelated families (detection rate 90%) and found 21 recurrent mutations in 63 families. The majority (67%) of patients were compound heterozygotes, while 33% were homozygotes. To determine the existence of common haplotypes and potential founder effects, we analyzed five microsatellite markers within and flanking the ATM gene. Haplotype analysis was carried out in 48/63 families harbouring 16 of the 21 recurrent mutations. Forty different haplotypes were detected in the 48 A-T families studied. We found that the majority of patients with the same recurrent mutation originated from the same geographical area. All but one recurrent mutation analyzed displayed a common haplotype suggesting a single origin that then spread to different geographical areas. The high number of different haplotypes does not allow the screening of ATM mutations by haplotype analysis alone in the Italian population. The finding of recurrent public mutations without founder effect suggests the existence of 'mild' hot spots of mutation located along the sequence of the ATM gene.

17586848
Current and potential therapeutic strategies for the treatment of ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, a high risk of cancer and immunodeficiency. These patients are also hypersensitive to radiotherapy. The gene product defective in this syndrome, ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated), normally recognizes DNA damage and signal to the DNA repair machinery and the cell cycle checkpoints to minimize the risk of genetic damage. No curative strategy for this disease exists. Treatment has focused on slowing the progress of the neurodegeneration; devising approaches for the treatment of tumours while minimizing side effects and treatment with immunoglobulin for the immunodeficiency. The most debilitating feature of this disorder is the progressive neurodegeneration due to loss of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and malfunction of other neuronal cells. Correcting for the loss of Purkinje cells is technically very difficult and would require transplantation of embryonic stem cells. However, since it seems likely that oxidative stress may contribute to the neurodegeneration in A-T, potential therapies based on the use of antioxidants offer some hope. We describe the natural course of disease, some supportive therapeutic approaches already in use and those with potential based on our knowledge of molecular and cellular characteristics of this disorder.

16266405
ATM gene founder haplotypes and associated mutations in Polish families with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an early onset autosomal recessive ataxia associated with characteristic chromosomal aberrations, cell cycle checkpoint defects, cancer susceptibility, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation. We utilized the protein truncation test (PTT), and single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) on cDNA, as well as denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) on genomic DNA (gDNA) to screen for mutations in 24 Polish A-T families. Twenty-six distinct Short Tandem Repeat (STR) haplotypes were identified. Three founder mutations accounted for 58% of the alleles. Three-quarters of the families had at least one recurring (shared) mutation, which was somewhat surprising given the low frequency of consanguinity in Poland. STR haplotyping greatly improved the efficiency of mutation detection. We identified 44 of the expected 48 mutations (92%): sixty-nine percent were nonsense mutations, 23% caused aberrant splicing, and 5% were missense mutations. Four mutations have not been previously described. Two of the Polish mutations have been observed previously in Amish and Mennonite A-T patients; this is compatible with historical records. Shared mutations shared the same Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) and STR haplotypes, indicating common ancestries. The Mennonite mutation, 5932 G>T, is common in Russian A-T families, and the STR haplovariants are the same in both Poland and Russia. Attempts to correlate phenotypes with genotypes were inconclusive due to the limited numbers of patients with identical mutations.

23440242
Pathogenesis of ataxia-telangiectasia: the next generation of ATM functions.
In 1988, the gene responsible for the autosomal recessive disease ataxia- telangiectasia (A-T) was localized to 11q22.3-23.1. It was eventually cloned in 1995. Many independent laboratories have since demonstrated that in replicating cells, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is predominantly a nuclear protein that is involved in the early recognition and response to double-stranded DNA breaks. ATM is a high-molecular-weight PI3K-family kinase. ATM also plays many important cytoplasmic roles where it phosphorylates hundreds of protein substrates that activate and coordinate cell-signaling pathways involved in cell-cycle checkpoints, nuclear localization, gene transcription and expression, the response to oxidative stress, apoptosis, nonsense-mediated decay, and others. Appreciating these roles helps to provide new insights into the diverse clinical phenotypes exhibited by A-T patients-children and adults alike-which include neurodegeneration, high cancer risk, adverse reactions to radiation and chemotherapy, pulmonary failure, immunodeficiency, glucose transporter aberrations, insulin-resistant diabetogenic responses, and distinct chromosomal and chromatin changes. An exciting recent development is the ATM-dependent pathology encountered in mitochondria, leading to inefficient respiration and energy metabolism and the excessive generation of free radicals that themselves create life-threatening DNA lesions that must be repaired within minutes to minimize individual cell losses.

10814674
Cancer risk and the ATM gene: a continuing debate.
Deficiencies in the ability of cells to sense and repair damage in individuals with rare genetic instability syndromes increase the risk of developing cancer. Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), such a condition, is associated with a high incidence of leukemia and lymphoma that develop in childhood. Although A-T is an autosomal recessive disorder, some penetrance appears in individuals with one mutated ATM gene (A-T carriers), namely, an increased risk of developing breast cancer. The gene mutated in A-T, designated ATM, is homologous to several DNA damage recognition and cell cycle checkpoint control genes from other organisms. Recent studies suggest that ATM is activated primarily in response to double-strand breaks, the major cytotoxic lesion caused by ionizing radiation, and can directly bind to and phosphorylate c-Abl, p53, and replication protein A (RPA). Analysis of ATM mutations in patients with A-T or with sporadic non-A-T cancers has suggested the existence of two classes of ATM mutation: null mutations leading to A-T and dominant negative missense mutations predisposing to cancer in the heterozygous state. Studies with A-T mouse models have helped determine the basis of lymphoid tumorigenesis in A-T and have shown that ATM plays a critical role in maintaining genetic stability by ensuring high-fidelity execution of chromosomal events. Thus, ATM appears to act as a caretaker of the genome.

9521587
A double missense mutation in the ATM gene of a Dutch family with ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, elevated alpha-fetoprotein levels, chromosomal instability, predisposition to cancer, and radiation sensitivity. We report the identification of a new, double missense mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia gene (ATM) of a Dutch family. This homozygous mutation consists of two consecutive base substitutions in exon 55: a T-->G transversion at position 7875 of the ATM cDNA and a G-->C transversion at position 7876. These transversions were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction/primer-induced restriction analysis with CelII. The double base substitution results in an amino acid change of an aspartic acid to a glutamic acid at codon 2625 and of an alanine to a proline at codon 2626 of the ATM protein. Both amino acids are conserved between the ATM protein and its functional homolog, the Atm gene product in the mouse. Furthermore, the Chou-Fasman and Robson predictions both demonstrate a change in the secondary structure of the ATM protein carrying the D2625E/A2626P mutation. These findings suggest that the double base substitution in the ATM gene is a disease-causing mutation.

19061978
Analysis of the relationships between ATM and the Rad54 paralogs involved in homologous recombination repair.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a pleiotropic genomic instability disorder caused by lack or inactivation of the ATM protein kinase and characterized by progressive ataxia, immunodeficiency, ionizing radiation sensitivity and cancer predisposition. ATM mobilizes the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks by phosphorylating key players in this response. Double strand breaks are repaired by either nonhomologous end-joining or homologous recombination (HR) in which the Rad54 and Rad54B paralogs function. Here, we investigated the functional relationships between Atm and the Rad54 proteins by constructing compound genotypes in mice. Mouse strains were generated that combined inactivation of the Atm, Rad54 and Rad54B genes. All mutant genotypes were viable, but obtained at sub-Mendelian ratios. Double mutants for Atm and each Rad54 paralog exhibited reduced body weight and shorter lifespan, but no distinct neurological phenotype. Concomitant inactivation of ATM and Rad54 did not increase IR sensitivity; however, the triple Atm/Rad54/Rad54B mutant exhibited a significant IR hypersensitivity compared to the other genotypes. Interestingly, Atm-/- animals also exhibited hypersensitivity to the crosslinking agent mitomycin C, which was increased by deficiency of either one of the Rad54 paralogs. Our results reveal a differential interaction of the ATM-mediated DNA damage response and Rad54 paralog-mediated HR depending on the DNA damaging agent that initiates the response.

16934683
Dramatic extension of tumor latency and correction of neurobehavioral phenotype in Atm-mutant mice with a nitroxide antioxidant.
Mutations in the ATM gene (mutated in ataxia telangiectasia) in both humans and mice predispose to lymphoid tumors. A defect in this gene also causes neurodegeneration in humans and a less severe neurological phenotype in mice. There is some evidence that oxidative stress contributes to these defects, suggesting that antioxidants could alleviate the phenotype. We demonstrate here that the antioxidant 5-carboxy-1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl (CTMIO) dramatically delays the onset of thymic lymphomas in Atm(-/-) mice which is not due to an enhancement of apoptosis by CTMIO. We also show that this compound corrects neurobehavioral deficits in these mice and reduces oxidative damage to Purkinje cells. The likely mechanism of action of CTMIO is due to a reduction in oxidative stress, which is protective against both the tumor progression and the development of neurological abnormalities. These data suggest that antioxidant therapy has considerable potential in the management of ataxia telangiectasia and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders where oxidative stress is implicated.

16540636
Defective p53 response and apoptosis associated with an ataxia-telangiectasia-like phenotype.
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), the protein defective in ataxia-telangiectasia, plays a central role in DNA damage response and signaling to cell cycle checkpoints. We describe here a cell line from a patient with an ataxia-telangiectasia-like clinical phenotype defective in the p53 response to radiation but with normal ATM activation and efficient downstream phosphorylation of other ATM substrates. No mutations were detected in ATM cDNA. A normal level of interaction between p53 and peptidyl-prolyl-isomerase Pin1 suggests that posttranslational modification was intact in these cells but operating at reduced level. Defective p53 stabilization was accompanied by defective induction of p53 effector genes and failure to induce apoptosis in response to DNA-damaging agents. Continued association between p53 and murine double minute-2 (Mdm2) occurred in irradiated ATL2ABR cells in response to DNA damage, and incubation with Mdm2 antagonists, nutlins, increased the stabilization of p53 and its transcriptional activity but failed to induce apoptosis. These results suggest that ATM-dependent stabilization of p53 and induction of apoptosis by radiation involve an additional factor(s) that is defective in ATL2ABR cells.

27884168
Ataxia telangiectasia: a review.
DEFINITION OF THE DISEASE: Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder primarily characterized by cerebellar degeneration, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, cancer susceptibility and radiation sensitivity. A-T is often referred to as a genome instability or DNA damage response syndrome. EPIDEMIOLOGY: The world-wide prevalence of A-T is estimated to be between 1 in 40,000 and 1 in 100,000 live births. CLINICAL DESCRIPTION: A-T is a complex disorder with substantial variability in the severity of features between affected individuals, and at different ages. Neurological symptoms most often first appear in early childhood when children begin to sit or walk. They have immunological abnormalities including immunoglobulin and antibody deficiencies and lymphopenia. People with A-T have an increased predisposition for cancers, particularly of lymphoid origin. Pulmonary disease and problems with feeding, swallowing and nutrition are common, and there also may be dermatological and endocrine manifestations. ETIOLOGY: A-T is caused by mutations in the ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia, Mutated) gene which encodes a protein of the same name. The primary role of the ATM protein is coordination of cellular signaling pathways in response to DNA double strand breaks, oxidative stress and other genotoxic stress. DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of A-T is usually suspected by the combination of neurologic clinical features (ataxia, abnormal control of eye movement, and postural instability) with one or more of the following which may vary in their appearance: telangiectasia, frequent sinopulmonary infections and specific laboratory abnormalities (e.g. IgA deficiency, lymphopenia especially affecting T lymphocytes and increased alpha-fetoprotein levels). Because certain neurological features may arise later, a diagnosis of A-T should be carefully considered for any ataxic child with an otherwise elusive diagnosis. A diagnosis of A-T can be confirmed by the finding of an absence or deficiency of the ATM protein or its kinase activity in cultured cell lines, and/or identification of the pathological mutations in the ATM gene. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS: There are several other neurologic and rare disorders that physicians must consider when diagnosing A-T and that can be confused with A-T. Differentiation of these various disorders is often possible with clinical features and selected laboratory tests, including gene sequencing. ANTENATAL DIAGNOSIS: Antenatal diagnosis can be performed if the pathological ATM mutations in that family have been identified in an affected child. In the absence of identifying mutations, antenatal diagnosis can be made by haplotype analysis if an unambiguous diagnosis of the affected child has been made through clinical and laboratory findings and/or ATM protein analysis. GENETIC COUNSELING: Genetic counseling can help family members of a patient with A-T understand when genetic testing for A-T is feasible, and how the test results should be interpreted. MANAGEMENT AND PROGNOSIS: Treatment of the neurologic problems associated with A-T is symptomatic and supportive, as there are no treatments known to slow or stop the neurodegeneration. However, other manifestations of A-T, e.g. immunodeficiency, pulmonary disease, failure to thrive and diabetes can be treated effectively.

9887333
Characterization of ATM gene mutations in 66 ataxia telangiectasia families.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by neurological and immunological symptoms, radiosensitivity and cancer predisposition. The gene mutated in AT, designated the ATM gene, encodes a large protein kinase with a PI-3 kinase-related domain. In this study, we investigated the mutational spectrum of the ATM gene in a cohort of AT patients living in Germany. We amplified and sequenced all 66 exons and the flanking untranslated regions from genomic DNA of 66 unrelated AT patients. We identified 46 different ATM mutations and 26 sequence polymorphisms and variants scattered throughout the gene. A total of 34 mutations have not been described in other populations. Seven mutations occurred in more than one family, but none of these accounted for more than five alleles in our patient group. The majority of the mutations were truncating, confirming that the absence of full-length ATM protein is the most common molecular basis of AT. Transcript analyses demonstrated single exon skipping as the consequence of most splice site substitutions, but a more complex pattern was observed for two mutations. Immunoblot studies of cell lines carrying ATM missense substitutions or in-frame deletions detected residual ATM protein in four cases. One of these mutations, a valine deletion proximal to the kinase domain, resulted in ATM protein levels >20% of normal in an AT lymphoblastoid cell line. In summary, our results survey and characterize a plethora of variations in the ATM gene identified by exon scanning sequencing and indicate a high diversity of mutations giving rise to AT in a non-isolated population.

12552566
Phenotypic cellular characterization of an ataxia telangiectasia patient carrying a causal homozygous missense mutation.
Most disease-causing mutations in Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) patients correspond to truncating mutations in the ATM gene with very few cases of AT patients carrying two missense sequence alterations being reported. The cellular phenotype of a lymphoblastoid cell line established from an AT patient (AT173) who showed classical clinical AT features, and carried two homozygous missense alterations, the 378T>A variant and 9022C>T located within the ATM kinase domain, has been characterized. ATM mRNA was detectable and the ATM protein level was approximately 50% of that seen in normal cell lines. Functional analysis of this protein revealed a total absence of ATM kinase activity measured either in vitro or in vivo, before and after exposure to ionizing radiation. The AT173 cell line was hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and exhibited a G1 cell cycle arrest defect and an accumulation of cells in G2 phase of the cell cycle after irradiation, a response that is identical to that seen in AT cell lines carrying truncating mutations. These phenotypic features strongly suggest that the 9022C>T (R3008C) missense mutation is the disease-causing mutation and that the presence of ATM protein is not always predictive of a normal cellular phenotype.

20966255
ATM activation by oxidative stress.
The ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein kinase is activated by DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) through the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) DNA repair complex and orchestrates signaling cascades that initiate the DNA damage response. Cells lacking ATM are also hypersensitive to insults other than DSBs, particularly oxidative stress. We show that oxidation of ATM directly induces ATM activation in the absence of DNA DSBs and the MRN complex. The oxidized form of ATM is a disulfide-cross-linked dimer, and mutation of a critical cysteine residue involved in disulfide bond formation specifically blocked activation through the oxidation pathway. Identification of this pathway explains observations of ATM activation under conditions of oxidative stress and shows that ATM is an important sensor of reactive oxygen species in human cells.

16941484
ATM mutations in Italian families with ataxia telangiectasia include two distinct large genomic deletions.
In patients affected by Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T), mutations in the ATM gene lead to loss-of-function alleles. Nonsense, splice-site variants, small insertions or deletions (frameshifts) and missense are the most commonly found mutations. Large genomic deletions (LGDs) are rare (approximately 1%) but can lead to the same phenotype. In compound heterozygotes, deletions are not detected by most screening strategies. We analysed the ATM gene in 12 unrelated Italian A-T patients and identified all 24 mutated alleles. Twelve mutations were novel. Standardized SNP and STR haplotyping followed by DHPLC screening of genomic DNA, allowed all but three mutations to be detected (approximately 87.5%). The remaining mutations required RT-PCR analysis of ATM transcript and Southern blotting of genomic DNA. We found three LGDs: one of 8.5 and two identical of 18 kb spanning exons 32-36 and 21-29, respectively. The breakpoints of these deletions were sequenced in an attempt to understand the mechanisms of mutations; both deletions involved regions rich in repeated elements.

18066086
Activation and regulation of ATM kinase activity in response to DNA double-strand breaks.
The ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) protein kinase is rapidly and specifically activated in response to DNA double-strand breaks in eukaryotic cells. In this review, we summarize recent insights into the mechanism of ATM activation, focusing on the role of the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex in this process. We also compare observations of the ATM activation process in different biological systems and highlight potential candidates for cellular factors that may participate in regulating ATM activity in human cells.

15054841
Slow progression of ataxia-telangiectasia with double missense and in frame splice mutations.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is caused by mutations of the ATM gene, the product of which is involved in the regulation of cellular responses to radiation damage. Ataxia usually starts in early childhood but a delayed age at onset and slower rate of neurological deterioration has been found for some patients with variant A-T. Only few patients have been documented to survive into the 4th decade. We report on a patient with an attenuated form of A-T who was diagnosed as having A-T by the age of 52 years and died by the age of 60 years. He was found to be a compound heterozygote for a double missense mutation (D2625E and A2626P) and a novel splicing mutation (496 + 5G --> A) of the ATM gene. Cytogenetic studies of the patient's lymphoblastoid cells revealed modest levels of bleomycin-induced chromosomal instability. Residual ATM protein was found at a level of 10-20% of wildtype. Low residual ATM kinase activity could be demonstrated towards p53, whereas it was poorly detectable towards nibrin. Our results corroborate the view that the clinical variability of A-T is partly determined by the mutation type and indicate that A-T can extend to late adulthood disease.

23502677
The innate immune response transcription factor relish is necessary for neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of ataxia-telangiectasia.
Neurodegeneration is a hallmark of the human disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) that is caused by mutation of the A-T mutated (ATM) gene. We have analyzed Drosophila melanogaster ATM mutants to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration in A-T. Previously, we found that ATM mutants upregulate the expression of innate immune response (IIR) genes and undergo neurodegeneration in the central nervous system. Here, we present evidence that activation of the IIR is a cause of neurodegeneration in ATM mutants. Three lines of evidence indicate that ATM mutations cause neurodegeneration by activating the Nuclear Factor-B (NF-B) transcription factor Relish, a key regulator of the Immune deficiency (Imd) IIR signaling pathway. First, the level of upregulation of IIR genes, including Relish target genes, was directly correlated with the level of neurodegeneration in ATM mutants. Second, Relish mutations inhibited upregulation of IIR genes and neurodegeneration in ATM mutants. Third, overexpression of constitutively active Relish in glial cells activated the IIR and caused neurodegeneration. In contrast, we found that Imd and Dif mutations did not affect neurodegeneration in ATM mutants. Imd encodes an activator of Relish in the response to gram-negative bacteria, and Dif encodes an immune responsive NF-B transcription factor in the Toll signaling pathway. These data indicate that the signal that causes neurodegeneration in ATM mutants activates a specific NF-B protein and does so through an unknown activator. In summary, these findings suggest that neurodegeneration in human A-T is caused by activation of a specific NF-B protein in glial cells.

10490633
Altered telomere nuclear matrix interactions and nucleosomal periodicity in ataxia telangiectasia cells before and after ionizing radiation treatment.
Cells derived from ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) patients show a prominent defect at chromosome ends in the form of chromosome end-to-end associations, also known as telomeric associations, seen at G(1), G(2), and metaphase. Recently, we have shown that the ATM gene product, which is defective in the cancer-prone disorder A-T, influences chromosome end associations and telomere length. A possible hypothesis explaining these results is that the defective telomere metabolism in A-T cells are due to altered interactions between the telomeres and the nuclear matrix. We examined these interactions in nuclear matrix halos before and after radiation treatment. A difference was observed in the ratio of soluble versus matrix-associated telomeric DNA between cells derived from A-T and normal individuals. Ionizing radiation treatment affected the ratio of soluble versus matrix-associated telomeric DNA only in the A-T cells. To test the hypothesis that the ATM gene product is involved in interactions between telomeres and the nuclear matrix, we examined such interactions in human cells expressing either a dominant-negative effect or complementation of the ATM gene. The phenotype of RKO colorectal tumor cells expressing ATM fragments containing a leucine zipper motif mimics the altered interactions of telomere and nuclear matrix similar to that of A-T cells. A-T fibroblasts transfected with wild-type ATM gene had corrected telomere-nuclear matrix interactions. Further, we found that A-T cells had different micrococcal nuclease digestion patterns compared to normal cells before and after irradiation, indicating differences in nucleosomal periodicity in telomeres. These results suggest that the ATM gene influences the interactions between telomeres and the nuclear matrix, and alterations in telomere chromatin could be at least partly responsible for the pleiotropic phenotypes of the ATM gene.

23266960
XCIND as a genetic disease of X-irradiation hypersensitivity and cancer susceptibility.
The XCIND syndrome is named after distinct hypersensitivity to ionizing (X-ray) irradiation, cancer susceptibility, immunodeficiency, neurological abnormality, and double-strand DNA breakage. The disorders comprising XCIND syndrome are usually inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is one such disease, and is caused by biallelic germline mutation of the Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. Heterozygous carriers of the ATM mutation, who do not show A-T-like clinical symptoms, are estimated to comprise 1% of the population. Thus, understanding the biological basis of XCIND, including A-T, should help shed light on the pathogenesis of genetic diseases with cancer susceptibility.

30348496
Inactive Atm abrogates DSB repair in mouse cerebellum more than does Atm loss, without causing a neurological phenotype.
The genome instability syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is caused by null mutations in the ATM gene, that lead to complete loss or inactivation of the gene's product, the ATM protein kinase. ATM is the primary mobilizer of the cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) - a broad signaling network in which many components are ATM targets. The major clinical feature of A-T is cerebellar atrophy, characterized by relentless loss of Purkinje and granule cells. In Atm-knockout (Atm-KO) mice, complete loss of Atm leads to a very mild neurological phenotype, suggesting that Atm loss is not sufficient to markedly abrogate cerebellar structure and function in this organism. Expression of inactive ("kinase-dead") Atm (Atm(KD)) in mice leads to embryonic lethality, raising the question of whether conditional expression of Atm(KD) in the murine nervous system would lead to a more pronounced neurological phenotype than Atm loss. We generated two mouse strains in which Atm(KD) was conditionally expressed as the sole Atm species: one in the CNS and one specifically in Purkinje cells. Focusing our analysis on Purkinje cells, the dynamics of DSB readouts indicated that DSB repair was delayed longer in the presence of Atm(KD) compared to Atm loss. However, both strains exhibited normal life span and displayed no gross cerebellar histological abnormalities or significant neurological phenotype. We conclude that the presence of Atm(KD) is indeed more harmful to DSB repair than Atm loss, but the murine central nervous system can reasonably tolerate the extent of this DSB repair impairment. Greater pressure needs to be exerted on genome stability to obtain a mouse model that recapitulates the severe A-T neurological phenotype.

22585167
ATM mutations in patients with hereditary pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancers are the fourth most-common cause of cancer-related deaths in the Western world, with >200,000 cases reported in 2010. Although up to 10% of these cases occur in familial patterns, the hereditary basis for predisposition in the vast majority of affected families is unknown. We used next-generation sequencing, including whole-genome and whole-exome analyses, and identified heterozygous, constitutional, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutations in 2 kindreds with familial pancreatic cancer. Mutations segregated with disease in both kindreds and tumor analysis demonstrated LOH of the wild-type allele. By using sequence analysis of an additional 166 familial pancreatic cancer probands, we identified 4 additional patients with deleterious mutations in the ATM gene, whereas we identified no deleterious mutations in 190 spouse controls (P = 0.046). When we considered only the mostly severely affected families with 3 or more pancreatic cancer cases, 4 deleterious mutations were found in 87 families (P = 0.009). Our results indicate that inherited ATM mutations play an important role in familial pancreatic cancer predisposition. SIGNIFICANCE: The genes responsible for the majority of cases of familial pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma are unknown. We here identify ATM as a predisposition gene for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Our results have important implications for the management of patients in affected families and illustrate the power of genome-wide sequencing to identify the basis of familial cancer syndromes.

22260947
Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in cerebella of Atm-/- mice is attributable to accumulation of reactive oxygen species.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an inherited disease, the most prominent feature of which is ataxia caused by degeneration of cerebellar neurons and synapses. The mechanisms underlying A-T neurodegeneration are still unclear, and many factors are likely to be involved. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a sensor of energy balance, and research on its function in neural cells has gained momentum in the last decade. The dual roles of AMPK in neuroprotection and neurodegeneration are complex, and they need to be identified and characterized. Using an Atm (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) gene deficient mouse model, we showed here that: (a) upregulation of AMPK phosphorylation and elevation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) coordinately occur in the cerebella of Atm-/- mice; (b) hydrogen peroxide induces AMPK phosphorylation in primary mouse cerebellar astrocytes in an Atm-independent manner; (c) administration of the novel antioxidant monosodium luminol (MSL) to Atm-/- mice attenuates the upregulation of both phosphorylated-AMPK (p-AMPK) and ROS, and corrects the neuromotor deficits in these animals. Together, our results suggest that oxidative activation of AMPK in the cerebellum may contribute to the neurodegeneration in Atm-/- mice, and that ROS and AMPK signaling pathways are promising therapeutic targets for treatment of A-T and other neurodegenerative diseases.

18431795
A rapid flow cytometry test based on histone H2AX phosphorylation for the sensitive and specific diagnosis of ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with onset in early childhood, caused by mutations in the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) gene. Diagnosis relies on laboratory tests showing high levels of serum alphafetoprotein, cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR) and absence or reduced levels of ATM protein. Many tests, however, are not sufficiently sensitive or specific for A-T, have long turnaround times, or require large blood samples. This prompted us to develop a new flow cytometry method for the diagnosis of A-T based on the measurement of histone H2AX phosphorylation. We established normal ranges of histone H2AX phosphorylation after 2 Gy IR by testing T-cell lines, lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and/or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or both from 20 genetically proven A-T and 46 control donors. To further evaluate the specificity and sensitivity of the test, we analyzed cells from 19 patients suspected of having A-T, and from one Friedreich Ataxia, one Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia type 2, and one Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome patients. Phosphorylated histone H2AX mean fluorescence intensity of irradiated A-T cells was significantly lower than that of healthy donors. The intrastaining, intraassay, and interassay imprecisions were <or=13.22%. Sensitivity and specificity were virtually 100% when the test was performed on PBMCs. Screening of 19 consecutive new patients with suspected A-T classified 15 patients as non-A-T and four as A-T; diagnosis of the latter four was subsequently confirmed by DNA sequencing to identify ATM mutations. The Friedreich Ataxia patient, the Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia type 2 patient and the Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome patient were classified as non-A-T. This flow cytometry test is very sensitive, specific and rapid, and requires only 2 ml of blood. It may thus be proposed for the early differential diagnosis of A-T as an alternative to methods requiring the production of LCLs.

12673126
Association of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutation/deletion with rhabdomyosarcoma.
Rhabdomyosarcoma is a common malignancy in children. There are two major types of rhabdomyosarcomas, the embryonal and the alveolar, differing in cytogenetic and morphologic features. The alveolar type of rhabdomyosarcoma is frequently associated with chromosome translocation t(2; 13) and poor clinical prognosis. Pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma remains obscure, and especially it occurs in the location where skeletal muscle is absent. We report here that there is a high frequency of association of rhabdomyosarcoma with ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutation/deletion. Totally 17 cases of rhabdomyosarcoma specimens were studied by immunohistochemical or immunofluorescent staining with ATM antibody and revealed that 7 of the 17 cases were negative for ATM expression (41%). Further analyses of rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines with RT-PCR revealed that in Rh30 cells, an alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, there are three separate deletions/mutations of the ATM mRNA. Western blotting analysis of the Rh30 cellular extract with anti-ATM antibody showed that there is an aberrant form of ATM protein within the Rh30 cells that are smaller than normal control. These results suggest, for the first time, a link of ATM gene deletion/mutation with rhabdomyosarcoma, and since ATM kinase is a crucial regulatory protein in DMA damage repair signaling pathway, and ATM deletion/mutation may contribute to pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma.

11679583
Accumulation of DNA damage and reduced levels of nicotine adenine dinucleotide in the brains of Atm-deficient mice.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a human genetic disorder caused by mutational inactivation of the ATM gene. A-T patients display a pleiotropic phenotype, in which a major neurological feature is progressive ataxia due to degeneration of cerebellar Purkinje and granule neurons. Disruption of the mouse Atm locus creates a murine model of A-T that exhibits most of the clinical and cellular features of the human disease, but the neurological phenotype is barely expressed. We present evidence for the accumulation of DNA strand breaks in the brains of Atm(-/-), supporting the notion that ATM plays a major role in maintaining genomic stability. We also show a perturbation of the steady state levels of pyridine nucleotides. There is a significant decrease in both the reduced and the oxidized forms of NAD and in the total levels of NADP(T) and NADP(+) in the brains of Atm(-/-) mice. The changes in NAD(T), NADH, NAD(+), NADP(T), and NADP(+) were progressive and observed primarily in the cerebellum of 4-month-old Atm(-/-) mice. Higher rates of mitochondrial respiration were also recorded in 4-month-old Atm(-/-) cerebella. Taken together, our findings support the hypothesis that absence of functional ATM results in continuous stress, which may be an important cause of the degeneration of cerebellar neurons in A-T.

23211698
Deep-intronic ATM mutation detected by genomic resequencing and corrected in vitro by antisense morpholino oligonucleotide (AMO).
Recent development of next-generation DNA sequencing (NGS) techniques is changing the approach to search for mutations in human genetic diseases. We applied NGS to study an A-T patient in which one of the two expected mutations was not found after DHPLC, cDNA sequencing and MLPA screening. The 160-kb ATM genomic region was divided into 31 partially overlapping fragments of 4-6kb and amplified by long-range PCR in the patient and mother, who carried the same mutation by segregation. We identified six intronic variants that were shared by the two genomes and not reported in the dbSNP(132) database. Among these, c.1236-405C>T located in IVS11 was predicted to be pathogenic because it affected splicing. This mutation creates a cryptic novel donor (5') splice site (score 1.00) 405bp upstream of the exon 12 acceptor (3') splice site. cDNA analysis showed the inclusion of a 212-bp non-coding 'pseudoexon' with a premature stop codon. We validated the functional effect of the splicing mutation using a minigene assay. Using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides, designed to mask the cryptic donor splice-site created by the c.1236-405C>T mutation, we abrogated the aberrant splicing product to a wild-type ATM transcript, and in vitro reverted the functional ATM kinase impairment of the patients' lymphoblasts. Resequencing is an effective strategy for identifying rare splicing mutations in patients for whom other mutation analyses have failed (DHPLC, MLPA, or cDNA sequencing). This is especially important because many of these patients will carry rare splicing variants that are amenable to antisense-based correction.

22952040
Incidence and clinical implications of ATM aberrations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
A subset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) carries mutations in ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM). Such ATM mutations may be particularly relevant in the setting of del11q, which invariably results in the deletion of one ATM allele. To improve our understanding of the frequency and type of ATM mutations that exist in CLL, we resequenced all ATM coding exons in 24 CLL with del11q using direct sequencing. We detected two missense mutations, resulting in an ATM mutation frequency of 8%; nonsense and frameshift mutations were not identified. Given the low ATM mutation frequency detected in this cohort, we proceeded with measurements of nonmutational ATM aberrations in CLL through analysis of the activation state of ATM in response to external irradiation. The phosphorylation state of ATM at Ser-1981 was measured using quantitative immunoblotting in purified CLL cells isolated from 251 CLL patients; data were normalized to simultaneous measurements of total ATM protein and actin. Resulting p-ATM/ATM and p-ATM/actin ratios were subsequently analyzed for prognostic significance inclusive and exclusive of TP53 exons 2-10 mutations. From these analyses, conducted in a large prospectively enrolled CLL patient cohort, neither the p-ATM/ATM nor the p-ATM/actin ratios were found to be prognostic for short survival. These data in aggregate demonstrate a low frequency of ATM aberrations in an unselected CLL cohort and do not support a major prognostic role for ATM aberrations in CLL, thus motivating renewed research efforts aimed at understanding the pathobiology of 11q deletions in CLL.  2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

23598976
Brain and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells as an in vitro model of neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.
The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase is a key transducer of the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks and its deficiency causes ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a pleiotropic genetic disorder primarily characterized by cerebellar neuropathy, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition. While enormous progress has been achieved in elucidating the biochemical and functional regulation of ATM in DNA damage response, and more recently in redox signalling and antioxidant defence, the factors that make neurons in A-T extremely vulnerable remain unclear. Given also that ATM knockout mice do not recapitulate the central nervous system phenotype, a number of human neural stem cell (hNSC) model systems have been developed to provide insights into the mechanisms of neurodegeneration associated with ATM dysfunction. Here we review the hNSC systems developed by us an others to model A-T.

23154512
Loss of expression of the double strand break repair protein ATM is associated with worse prognosis in colorectal cancer and loss of Ku70 expression is associated with CIN.
Repair of double strand DNA breaks (DSBs) is pivotal in maintaining normal cell division and disruption of this system has been shown to be a key factor in carcinogenesis. Loss of expression of the DSB repair proteins have previously been shown to be associated with poorer survival in colorectal cancer. We wished to ascertain the relationship of altered expression of the DSB repair proteins -H2AX (gamma-H2AX), ATM and Ku70 with biological and clinico-pathological features of colorectal cancer. 908 tumours from the VICTOR clinical trial of stage II/III colorectal cancer were analysed for expression of -H2AX, ATM and Ku70 using immunohistochemistry. Expression levels were correlated with CIN and with disease-free survival, correcting for microsatellite instability, BRAF/KRAS mutation status, Dukes stage, chemo/radiotherapy, age, gender and tumour location. Down-regulated Ku70 expression was associated with chromosomal instability (p=0.029) in colorectal cancer. Reduced ATM expression was an independent marker of poor disease-free survival (HR=1.67, 95% CI 1.11-2.50, p=0.015). For Ku70, further studies are required to investigate the potential relationship of non-homologous end joining with chromosomal instability. Loss of ATM expression might serve as a biomarker of poor prognosis in colorectal cancer.

22179422
Lack of ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase induces structural and functional changes in the heart: role in -adrenergic receptor-stimulated apoptosis.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) is involved in cell cycle checkpoints, DNA repair and apoptosis. -Adrenergic receptor (-AR) stimulation induces cardiac myocyte apoptosis. Here we analysed basal myocardial structure and function in ATM knockout (KO) mice and tested the hypothesis that ATM modulates -AR-stimulated myocyte apoptosis. Left ventricular (LV) structure and function, myocyte apoptosis, fibrosis and expression of fibrosis-, hypertrophy- and apoptosis-related proteins were examined in wild-type (WT) and KO mice with or without l-isoprenaline treatment for 24 h. Body and heart weights were lower in KO mice. M-Mode echocardiography showed reduced septal wall thicknesses and LV diameters in KO mice. Doppler echocardiography showed an increased ratio of early peak velocity (E wave) to that of the late LV filling (A wave) in KO mice. Basal fibrosis and myocyte cross-sectional area were greater in KO hearts. Expression of fibrosis-related genes (connective tissue growth factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) and hypertrophy-related gene (atrial natriuretic peptide) was higher in KO hearts. -Adrenergic receptor stimulation increased myocyte apoptosis to a similar extent in both groups. Activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases and expression and phosphorylation of p53 in response to -AR stimulation were only observed in the WT group. Akt phosphorylation was lower in KO sham-treated animals and remained lower following -AR stimulation in the KO group. -Adrenergic receptor stimulation activated glycogen synthase kinase-3 to a similar extent in both groups. Thus, lack of ATM induces structural and functional changes in the heart, with enhanced myocardial fibrosis and myocyte hypertrophy. -Adrenergic receptor-stimulated apoptosis in WT hearts is associated with a p53- and JNKs-dependent mechanism, while decreased Akt activity may play a role in increased myocyte apoptosis in the absence of ATM.

18674748
ATM gene mutations result in both recessive and dominant expression phenotypes of genes and microRNAs.
The defining characteristic of recessive disorders is the absence of disease in heterozygous carriers of the mutant alleles. However, it has been recognized that recessive carriers may differ from noncarriers in some phenotypes. Here, we studied ataxia telangiectasia (AT), a classical recessive disorder caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. We compared the gene and microRNA expression phenotypes of noncarriers, AT carriers who have one copy of the ATM mutations, and AT patients with two copies of ATM mutations. We found that some phenotypes are more similar between noncarriers and AT carriers compared to AT patients, as expected for a recessive disorder. However, for some expression phenotypes, AT carriers are more similar to the patients than to the noncarriers. Analysis of one of these expression phenotypes, TNFSF4 level, allowed us to uncover a regulatory pathway where ATM regulates TNFSF4 expression through MIRN125B (also known as miR-125b or miR125b) [corrected] In AT carriers and AT patients, this pathway is disrupted. As a result, the level of MIRN125B is lower and the level of its target gene, TNFSF4, is higher than in noncarriers. A decreased level of MIRN125B is associated with breast cancer, and an elevated level of TNFSF4 is associated with atherosclerosis. Thus, our findings provide a mechanistic suggestion for the increased risk of breast cancer and heart disease in AT carriers. By integrating molecular and computational analyses of gene and microRNA expression, we show the complex consequences of a human gene mutation.

20179206
Atm-deficient mice exhibit increased sensitivity to dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis characterized by elevated DNA damage and persistent immune activation.
The role of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), a DNA double-strand break recognition and response protein, in inflammation and inflammatory diseases is unclear. We have previously shown that high levels of systemic DNA damage are induced by intestinal inflammation in wild-type mice. To determine the effect of Atm deficiency in inflammation, we induced experimental colitis in Atm(-/-), Atm(+/-), and wild-type mice via dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) administration. Atm(-/-) mice had higher disease activity indices and rates of mortality compared with heterozygous and wild-type mice. Systemic DNA damage and immune response were characterized in peripheral blood throughout and after three cycles of treatment. Atm(-/-) mice showed increased sensitivity to levels of DNA strand breaks in peripheral leukocytes, as well as micronucleus formation in erythroblasts, compared with heterozygous and wild-type mice, especially during remission periods and after the end of treatment. Markers of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species-mediated damage, including 8-oxoguanine and nitrotyrosine, were present both in the distal colon and in peripheral leukocytes, with Atm(-/-) mice manifesting more 8-oxoguanine formation than wild-type mice. Atm(-/-) mice showed greater upregulation of inflammatory cytokines and significantly higher percentages of activated CD69+ and CD44+ T cells in the peripheral blood throughout treatment. ATM, therefore, may be a critical immunoregulatory factor dampening the deleterious effects of chronic DSS-induced inflammation, necessary for systemic genomic stability and homeostasis of the gut epithelial barrier.

23667852
Identification of ATM mutations in Korean siblings with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder. It is characterized by early-onset, progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, conjunctival telangiectasias, immunodeficiency, and an increased risk of malignancy. Although A-T is known to be the most common cause of progressive cerebellar ataxia in childhood, there have been no confirmed cases in Korea. We report the clinical and genetic findings of Korean siblings who presented with limb and truncal ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, and telangiectasias of the eyes. Sequence analysis of the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene revealed a known missense mutation (c.8546G>C; p.Arg2849Pro) and a novel intronic variant of intron 17 (c.2639-19_2639-7del13). Reverse-transcription PCR and sequencing analysis revealed that the c.2639-19_2639-7del13 variant causes a splicing aberration that potentiates skipping exon 18. Because A-T is quite rare in Korea, the diagnosis of A-T in Korean patients can be delayed. We recommend that a diagnosis of A-T should be suspected in Korean patients exhibiting the clinical features of A-T.

22960875
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) genetic variant in Italian centenarians.
Lifespan is attributable to genetic factors and some studies have attempted to identify putative genes implicated in human longevity. Several genetic loci have been associated with longevity, but some of these are not replicable, probably due to the vast differences among ethnicities. We analyzed in 128 Italian long-lived individuals and 150 unrelated healthy subjects, the recently reported association between rs189037 in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene promoter and longevity in Chinese nonagenarians/centenarians. Our study confirms the association between the rs189037 C/T genotype and longevity in Italian centenarians, with an odds ratio of 1.85 (95 % CI 0.99-3.45). To understand the genetic basis for longevity is an extraordinarily difficult task, and therefore it is important to replicate any positive findings, especially if detected in other ethnic groups, in order to reach reliable conclusions on the real effect that candidate genes have on longevity.

15863839
Heterozygous mutation of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene aggravates hypercholesterolemia in apoE-deficient mice.
Individuals with a heterozygous mutation at the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) have been reported to be predisposed to ischemic heart disease. This report examined for the first time the effect of a heterozygous ATM mutation (ATM(+)(/-)) on plasma lipid levels and atherosclerosis intensity using ATM(+/-), ATM(+)(/+) (wild type), ATM(+)(/+)/LDLR(-)(/-) (low density lipoprotein receptor knockout), ATM(+)(/-)/LDLR(-)(/-), ATM(+)(/+)/ApoE(-)(/-) (apolipoprotein E knockout), and ATM(+)(/-)/ApoE(-)(/-) mice. Our data demonstrated that the plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels in ATM(+)(/-) and ATM(+)(/-)/LDLR(-)(/-) mice were approximately the same as those in ATM(+)(/+) and ATM(+)(/+)/LDLR(-)(/-) control mice, respectively. In contrast, the plasma cholesterol level was significantly higher in ATM(+)(/-)/ApoE(-)(/-) mice than in ATM(+)(/+)/ApoE(-)(/-) control mice. In addition, the ATM(+)(/-)/ApoE(-)(/-) mice showed higher plasma apoB-48 levels, slower clearance for plasma apoB-48-carrying lipoproteins, and more advanced atherosclerotic lesions in the aorta compared with the ATM(+)(/+)/ApoE(-)(/-) mice. These novel results suggest that the product of ATM is involved in an apoE-independent pathway for catabolism of apoB-48-carrying remnants; therefore, superimposition of a heterozygous ATM mutation onto an ApoE deficiency background reduces the clearance of apoB-48-carrying lipoproteins from the blood circulation and promotes the formation of atherosclerosis.

33012025
Parents of ataxia-telangiectasia patients display a distinct cellular immune phenotype mimicking ATM-mutated patients.
BACKGROUND: Heterozygous relatives of ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) patients are at an increased risk for certain AT-related manifestations. We also show that there is an increase of infection frequency in parents of AT patients. Thus, we hypothesized that the parents might exhibit immune alterations similar to their affected children. METHODS: Lymphocyte phenotyping to enumerate T- and B-cell subsets was performed. Functional analyses included in vitro quantified -H2AX, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase(PARP) and caspase-9 proteins. Chromosomal instability was determined by comet assay. RESULTS: We analyzed 20 AT patients (14F/6M), 31 parents (16F/15M), and 35 age-matched healthy controls. The AT patients' parents exhibited low frequency of naive CD4(+) T- (n=14, 45%) and recent thymic emigrants (n=11, 35%) in comparison with the age-matched healthy donors. Interestingly, parents with low naive T cells also demonstrated high rate of recurrent infections (9/14, 64%). In comparison with age-matched controls, parents who had recurrent infections and low naive T cells showed significantly higher baseline -H2AX levels and H(2) O(2) -induced DNA damage as well as increased cleaved caspase-9 and PARP proteins. CONCLUSION: Parents of AT patients could present with recurrent infections and display cellular defects that mimic AT patients. The observed immunological changes could be associated with increased DNA double-strand breaks.

18321536
Rapid screen for truncating ATM mutations by PTT-ELISA.
Mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene are responsible for the autosomal recessive genetic disorder, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). Approximately 80% of ATM mutations found in A-T patients results in truncations, which can be detected by Protein Truncation Test (PTT). Conventional PTT uses SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to detect mobility of radiolabeled truncated protein fragments. In this study, we developed a non-radioactive Protein Truncation Test which utilizes an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (PTT-ELISA) to detect ATM mutations in eight overlapping fragments. N- and C-terminal epitopes (c-myc and V5, respectively) were introduced into transcription/translation products, which could then be detected by Sandwich ELISA. Using this assay, we screened 9 newly diagnosed A-T patients consecutively. Of the 18 expected mutations, 14 truncating mutations were independently identified by cDNA direct sequencing and/or DNA dHPLC analysis. PTT-ELISA detected all of these 14. Four mutations were novel. The PTT-ELISA provides a rapid method for detecting truncating mutations in large genes and should be considered prior to using more laborious or costly methods, such as direct sequencing.

21576124
Arginine-rich cell-penetrating peptide dramatically enhances AMO-mediated ATM aberrant splicing correction and enables delivery to brain and cerebellum.
Antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (AMOs) can reprogram pre-mRNA splicing by complementary binding to a target site and regulating splice site selection, thereby offering a potential therapeutic tool for genetic disorders. However, the application of this technology into a clinical scenario has been limited by the low correction efficiency in vivo and inability of AMOs to efficiently cross the blood brain barrier and target brain cells when applied to neurogenetic disorders such as ataxia-telangiecatasia (A-T). We previously used AMOs to correct subtypes of ATM splicing mutations in A-T cells; AMOs restored up to 20% of the ATM protein and corrected the A-T cellular phenotype. In this study, we demonstrate that an arginine-rich cell-penetrating peptide, (RXRRBR)(2)XB, dramatically improved ATM splicing correction efficiency when conjugated with AMOs, and almost fully corrected aberrant splicing. The restored ATM protein was close to normal levels in cells with homozygous splicing mutations, and a gene dose effect was observed in cells with heterozygous mutations. A significant amount of the ATM protein was still detected 21 days after a single 5 m treatment. Systemic administration of an fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled (RXRRBR)(2)XB-AMO in mice showed efficient uptake in the brain. Fluorescence was evident in Purkinje cells after a single intravenous injection of 60 mg/kg. Furthermore, multiple injections significantly increased uptake in all areas of the brain, notably in cerebellum and Purkinje cells, and showed no apparent signs of toxicity. Taken together, these results highlight the therapeutic potential of (RXRRBR)(2)XB-AMOs in A-T and other neurogenetic disorders.

15044255
Bone marrow transplantation restores immune system function and prevents lymphoma in Atm-deficient mice.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a human autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM). A-T is characterized by progressive cerebellar degeneration, variable immunodeficiency, and a high incidence of leukemia and lymphoma. Recurrent sino-pulmonary infections secondary to immunodeficiency and hematopoietic malignancies are major causes of morbidity and mortality in A-T patients. In mice, an introduced mutation in Atm leads to a phenotype that recapitulates many of the symptoms of A-T, including immune system abnormalities and susceptibility to malignancy. Here we show that the replacement of the bone marrow compartment in Atm knockout mice (Atm(-/-)) using a clinically relevant, nonmyeloablative host-conditioning regimen can be used to overcome the immune deficiencies and prevent the malignancies observed in these mice. Therefore, bone marrow transplantation may prove to be of therapeutic benefit in A-T patients.

32791865
Ataxia-telangiectasia: epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical phenotype, diagnosis, prognosis and management.
INTRODUCTION: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, variable immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, and cancer predisposition. Mutations cause A-T in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encoding a serine/threonine-protein kinase. AREAS COVERED: The authors reviewed the literature on PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases to collect comprehensive data related to A-T. This review aims to discuss various update aspects of A-T, including epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, prognosis, and management. EXPERT OPINION: A-T as a congenital disorder has phenotypic heterogeneity, and the severity of symptoms in different patients depends on the severity of mutations. This review provides a comprehensive overview of A-T, although some relevant questions about pathogenesis remain unanswered, probably owing to the phenotypic heterogeneity of this monogenic disorder. The presence of various clinical and immunologic manifestations in A-T indicates that the identification of the role of defective ATM in phenotype can be helpful in the better management and treatment of patients in the future.

24733832
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and hypersegmented neutrophils in a patient with ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder: potential diagnostic clues?
Ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, and has symptoms similar to ataxia-telangiectasia (AT). ATLD is caused by mutations in the MRE11 gene, involved in DNA double-strand break repair (DSBR). In contrast to AT, ATLD patients lack key clinical features, such as telangiectasia or immunodeficiency, and are therefore difficult to be diagnosed. We report a female ATLD patient presenting with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and hypersegmented neutrophils, previously undescribed features in this disorder, and potential diagnostic clues to differentiate ATLD from other conditions. The patient showed slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia from 2 years of age, and MRI revealed atrophy of the cerebellum, oculomotor apraxia, mild cognitive impairment, writing dystonia, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism with primary amenorrhea, and hypersegmented neutrophils. Western blot assay demonstrated total loss of MRE11 and reduction of ATM-dependent phosphorylation; thus, we diagnosed ATLD. Genetically, a novel missense mutation (c.140C>T) was detected in the MRE11 gene, but no other mutation was found in the patient. Our presenting patient suggests that impaired DSBR may be associated with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and neutrophil hypersegmentation. In conclusion, when assessing patients with ataxia of unknown cause, ATLD should be considered, and the gonadal state and peripheral blood smear samples evaluated.

23807571
Twelve novel Atm mutations identified in Chinese ataxia telangiectasia patients.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized mainly by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, and immunodeficiency. This disease is caused by mutations of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (Atm) gene. More than 500 Atm mutations that are responsible for A-T have been identified so far. However, there have been very few A-T cases reported in China, and only two Chinese A-T patients have undergone Atm gene analysis. In order to systemically investigate A-T in China and map their Atm mutation spectrum, we recruited eight Chinese A-T patients from six unrelated families nationwide. Using direct sequencing of genomic DNA and the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, we identified twelve pathogenic Atm mutations, including one missense, four nonsense, five frameshift, one splicing, and one large genomic deletion. All the Atm mutations we identified were novel, and no homozygous mutation and founder-effect mutation were found. These results suggest that Atm mutations in Chinese populations are diverse and distinct largely from those in other ethnic areas.

33779842
Evidence for pathogenicity of variant ATM Val1729Leu in a family with ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder caused by mutations in the gene of ATM serine/threonine kinase. It is characterized by neurodegeneration, leading to severe ataxia, immunodeficiency, increased cancer susceptibility, and telangiectasia. Here, we discovered a co-segregation of two ATM gene variants with ataxia telangiectasia in an Egyptian family. While one of these variants (NM_000051.4(ATM_i001):p.(Val128*)) has previously been reported as pathogenic, the other one (NM_000051.4(ATM_i001):p.(Val1729Leu)) is regarded as a variant of uncertain significance. Our findings in this family provide additional evidence for causality of the second variant and argue that its status should be changed to pathogenic.

33743388
Phenotypic variability in patients with unique double homozygous mutations causing variant ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by bi-allelic mutations in the Ataxia-Telangiectasia-Mutated (ATM) gene. Complete lack of ATM activity leads to severe A-T and mutations allowing for residual activity cause a milder phenotype, termed variant A-T. There are only sparse data on the variability in phenotypes of variant A-T patients carrying the same mutations. A retrospective study of 15 patients with variant A-T, all double homozygous for the same mutations was conducted. The age of first symptom ranged from 4-180 months, including: truncal ataxia at <18 months of age in 9 patients, ataxia and instability only during fever in one patient, dystonia in one patient and malignancy in 4 patients. Global developmental delay and occulo-motor apraxia were recorded in 4/14 patients. Variant A-T patients with the same mutations in ATM, have variable phenotypes. Environmental, epigenetic, and post translational factors are likely to play a role in creation of the phenotype in variant A-T patients.

32748564
Severe reaction to radiotherapy provoked by hypomorphic germline mutations in ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene).
BACKGROUND: A minority of breast cancer (BC) patients suffer from severe reaction to adjuvant radiotherapy (RT). Although deficient DNA double-strand break repair is considered the main basis for the reactions, pretreatment identification of high-risk patients has been challenging. METHODS: To retrospectively determine the etiology of severe local reaction to RT in a 39-year-old woman with BC, we performed next-generation sequencing followed by further clinical and functional studies. RESULTS: We found a -4 intronic variant (c.2251-4A>G) in trans with a synonymous (c.3576G>A) variant affecting the ATM DNA-repair gene (NG_009830.1, NM_000051.3) which is linked to autosomal recessive ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). We verified abnormal transcripts resulting from both variants, next to a minor wild-type transcript leading to a residual ATM kinase activity and genomic instability. Follow-up examination of the patient revealed no classic sign of A-T but previously unnoticed head dystonia and mild dysarthria, a family history of BC and late-onset ataxia segregating with the variants. Additionally, her serum level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was elevated similar to A-T patients. CONCLUSION: Considering the variable presentations of A-T and devastating impact of severe reactions to RT, we suggest a routine measurement of AFP in RT-candidate BC patients followed by next-generation sequencing with special attention to non-canonical splice site and synonymous variants in ATM.

20869334
Over-expression of miR-100 is responsible for the low-expression of ATM in the human glioma cell line: M059J.
M059J and M059K cells were isolated from different portions of the same human malignant glioma. M059J cells are more radiosensitive than M059K cells due to the absence of DNA-PKcs and low-expression of ATM. The mechanism concerning the absence of DNA-PKcs in M059J is due to the frameshift mutation in PRKDC (DNA-PKcs gene); however, the reason for the low-expression of ATM in M059J cells remains unclear. We showed here that the main reason for the lower ATM level in M059J cells was not related to the transcriptional regulation or protein degradation but was related to post-transcriptional regulation. Based on database information, we found that the 3'-untranslational region (UTR) of ATM contains a miR-100 binding site. By using an RNase protection assay and qRT-PCR, we identified that miR-100 is highly-expressed in M059J cells. We further demonstrated that miR-100 bound to the 3'-UTR of ATM. Knocking down miR-100 promotes ATM expression in M059J cells. Up-regulating miR-100 in M059K cells and other cancer cells reduces ATM expression and sensitizes these cells to ionizing radiation. These results indicate that ATM is a target of miR-100, elucidating that the low-expression of ATM in M059J cells is mainly due to the high expression of miR-100. These results also suggest that miR-100 could be a useful tool to target ATM and sensitize tumor cells to ionizing radiation.

34424493
Refractory T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma in a patient with ataxia-telangiectasia caused by novel compound heterozygous variants in ATM.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive chromosomal breakage syndrome caused by mutation of the ATM (A-T mutated) gene, which encodes a protein kinase that has a major role in the cellular response to DNA damage. Approximately, 10% of A-T patients develop lymphoid malignancies. Deaths caused by extreme sensitivity to chemotherapy for malignancy have been reported, and cancer treatment in A-T is extraordinarily difficult, needing careful monitoring and individualized protocols. We report the case of a 12-year-old girl with A-T diagnosed at the age of 3 in association with IgA deficiency and recurrent pulmonary infections. Sanger sequencing revealed compound heterozygosity of the ATM gene, which bore two novel mutations. At the age of 12, she developed stage IV T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma. The tumor was resistant to chemotherapy, and she unfortunately died of cardiac insufficiency and multiple organ failure induced by rapid progression of the disease. The treatment approach for children with A-T and advanced-stage B-non-Hodgkin lymphoma must be refined.

32172615
A novel mutation in ATM gene in a Saudi female with ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia is a hereditary multisystem disorder with a wide range of symptoms and signs. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner due to a mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, which encodes a protein kinase with a domain related to a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3 kinase) proteins that respond to DNA damage by phosphorylating key substrates involved in DNA repair and/or cell cycle control. The characteristics of the disease include progressive cerebellar ataxia beginning between ages one and four years, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, telangiectasias of the conjunctiva, immunodeficiency with frequent infections, and an increased risk for malignancy. In this article, we report a novel homozygous missense variant c.1516G>T, p.(Gly506Cys) in the ATM gene causing ataxia telangiectasia in a Saudi female. This variant led to the development of a later onset disease (at the age of 14years) and the classical neurodegenerative process both clinically and on imaging. However, no immune system dysfunction or endocrine abnormalities were present. This is the second novel mutation in this gene so far reported from Saudi Arabia. The novel mutation described in the present study widened the genetic spectrum of ATM-associated diseases, which will benefit studies addressing this disease in the future.

22350747
The atm-1 gene is required for genome stability in Caenorhabditis elegans.
The Ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene in humans was identified as the basis of a rare autosomal disorder leading to cancer susceptibility and is now well known as an important signal transducer in response to DNA damage. An approach to understanding the conserved functions of this gene is provided by the model system, Caenorhabditis elegans. In this paper we describe the structure and loss of function phenotype of the ortholog atm-1. Using bioinformatic and molecular analysis we show that the atm-1 gene was previously misannotated. We find that the transcript is in fact a product of three gene predictions, Y48G1BL.2 (atm-1), K10E9.1, and F56C11.4 that together make up the complete coding region of ATM-1. We also characterize animals that are mutant for two available knockout alleles, gk186 and tm5027. As expected, atm-1 mutant animals are sensitive to ionizing radiation. In addition, however, atm-1 mutants also display phenotypes associated with genomic instability, including low brood size, reduced viability and sterility. We document several chromosomal fusions arising from atm-1 mutant animals. This is the first time a mutator phenotype has been described for atm-1 in C. elegans. Finally we demonstrate the use of a balancer system to screen for and capture atm-1-derived mutational events. Our study establishes C. elegans as a model for the study of ATM as a mutator potentially leading to the development of screens to identify therapeutic targets in humans.

28123174
New diagnosis of atypical ataxia-telangiectasia in a 17-year-old boy with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and a novel ATM mutation.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive chromosome breakage disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene. Typically, it presents in early childhood with progressive cerebellar dysfunction along with immunodeficiency and oculocutaneous telangiectasia. An increased risk of malignancy is also associated with the syndrome and, rarely, may be the presenting feature in small children. We describe a 17-year-old boy with slurred speech, mild motor delays and learning disability diagnosed with atypical A-T in the setting of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Suspicion for A-T was raised after review of a peripheral blood karyotype demonstrating rearrangements involving chromosomes 7 and/or 14. The diagnosis was confirmed after molecular testing identified a novel homozygous missense variant in ATM (c.5585T>A; p.Leu1862His) that resulted in protein instability and abolished serine/threonine protein kinase activity. To our knowledge, this is the first report of concurrent A-T and lymphoid malignancy diagnoses in an older child or adult with only mild neurological disease. Our experience suggests that screening for the disorder should be considered in any individual with lymphoid malignancy and neurological findings, especially as radiation and certain chemotherapy protocols are contraindicated in A-T.

31921190
Ataxia Telangiectasia Diagnosed on Newborn Screening-Case Cohort of 5 Years' Experience.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a genetic condition caused by mutations involving ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated). This gene is responsible for the expression of a DNA double stranded break repair kinase, the ATM protein kinase. The syndrome encompasses combined immunodeficiency and various degrees of neurological abnormalities and increased risk of malignancy. Typically, patients present early in life with delay in neurological milestones, but very infrequently, with life threatening infections typical of a profound T cell deficiency. It would therefore be unexpected to identify this condition immediately after birth using T cell receptor excision circle (TREC)-based newborn screening (NBS) for SCID. We sought to evaluate the frequency of AT detected by NBS, and to assess immunity as well as the genetic aberrations associated with this early presentation. Here, we describe the clinical, laboratory, and genetic features of patients diagnosed with AT through the Ontario NBS program for SCID, and followed in our center since its inception in 2013. Four patients were diagnosed with AT as a result of low TRECs on NBS. In each case, whole exome sequencing was diagnostic. All of our patients had compound heterozygous mutations involving the FRAP-ATM-TRRAP (FAT) domain of the ATM gene, which appears critical for kinase activity and is highly sensitive to mutagenesis. Our patients presented with profound lymphopenia involving both B and T cells. The ratio of nave/memory CD45+RA/RO T cells population was variable. T cell repertoire showed decreased T cell diversity. Two out of four patients had decreased specific antibody response to vaccination and hypogammaglobulinemia requiring IVIG replacement. In two patients, profound decreased responses to phytohemagglutinin stimulation was observed. In the other two patients, the initial robust response declined with time. In summary, the rate of detection of AT through NBS had been surprisingly high at our center. One case was identified per year, while the total rate for SCID has been five new cases per year. This early detection may allow for better prospective evaluation of AT shortly after birth, and may assist in formulating early and more effective interventions both for the neurological as well as the immune abnormalities in this syndrome.

24667671
The versatile functions of ATM kinase.
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase, the mutation of which causes the autosomal recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia, plays an essential role in the maintenance of genome stability. Extensive studies have revealed that activated ATM signals to a massive list of proteins to facilitate cell cycle checkpoints, DNA repair, and many other aspects of physiological responses in the event of DNA double-strand breaks. ATM also plays functional roles beyond the well-characterized DNA damage response (DDR). In this review article, we discuss the recent findings on the molecular mechanisms of ATM in DDR, the mitotic spindle checkpoint, as well as hyperactive ATM signaling in cancer invasion and metastasis.

32958592
Ataxia telangiectasia: what the neurologist needs to know.
Ataxia telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive DNA repair disorder characterised by complex neurological symptoms, with an elevated risk of malignancy, immunodeficiency and other systemic complications. Patients with variant ataxia telangiectasia-with some preserved ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase activity-have a milder and often atypical phenotype, which can lead to long delays in diagnosis. Clinicians need to be aware of the spectrum of clinical presentations of ataxia telangiectasia, especially given the implications for malignancy surveillance and management. Here, we review the phenotypes of ataxia telangiectasia, illustrated with case reports and videos, and discuss its pathological mechanisms, diagnosis and management.

33547824
The spectrum of ATM gene mutations in Iranian patients with ataxia-telangiectasia.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by a distinct range of clinical manifestations, including progressive ataxia, immunodeficiency, and radiosensitivity. METHODS: Clinical data, laboratory results, and genetic data were collected from forty-three A-T patients. Whole-exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing were done for the patients clinically diagnosed as suffering from A-T. Based on the phenotype severity of the disease, patients were divided into severe and mild subgroups. RESULTS: The median (IQR) age of diagnosis in this cohort was 5 (3-7) years, and various types of clinical manifestations, including fever (P=.005), lower respiratory tract infection (P=.033), diarrhea (P=.014), and hepatosplenomegaly (P=.032), were significantly higher among patients diagnosed with the severe phenotype. Our results showed a correlation between phenotype severity and mutation type. The chance of having severe phenotype in patients who have severe mutations, including frameshift and nonsense, was 7.3 times higher than in patients who were categorized in the mild genotype group (odds ratio= 7.3, P=.006). Thirty-four types of mutations including 9 novel mutations were observed in our study. CONCLUSION: Molecular analysis provides the opportunity for accurate diagnosis and timely management in A-T patients with chronic progressive disease, especially infections and the risk of malignancies. This study characterizes for the first time the broad spectrum of mutations and phenotypes in Iranian A-T patients, which is required for carrier detection and reducing the burden of disease in the future using the patients' families and for the public healthcare system.

23011031
Reducing mitochondrial ROS improves disease-related pathology in a mouse model of ataxia-telangiectasia.
The disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) has no cure and few treatment options. It is caused by mutations in the ATM kinase, which functions in the DNA-damage response and redox sensing. In addition to severe cerebellar degeneration, A-T pathology includes cancer predisposition, sterility, immune system dysfunction, and bone marrow abnormalities. These latter phenotypes are recapitulated in the ATM null (ATM(-/-)) mouse model of the disease. Since oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction are implicated in A-T, we determined whether reducing mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) via overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria (mCAT) alleviates A-T-related pathology in ATM(-/-) mice. We found that mCAT has many beneficial effects in this context, including reduced propensity to develop thymic lymphoma, improved bone marrow hematopoiesis and macrophage differentiation in vitro, and partial rescue of memory T-cell developmental defects. Our results suggest that positive effects observed on cancer development may be linked to mCAT reducing mitochondrial ROS, lactate production, and TORC1 signaling in transforming double-positive cells, whereas beneficial effects in memory T cells appear to be TORC1-independent. Altogether, this study provides proof-of-principle that reducing mitochondrial ROS production per se may be therapeutic for the disease, which may have advantages compared with more general antioxidant strategies.

22276117
The association between ATM IVS 22-77 T>C and cancer risk: a meta-analysis.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: It has become increasingly clear that ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated) safeguards genome stability, which is a cornerstone of cellular homeostasis, and ATM IVS 22-77 T>C affects the normal activity of ATM proteins. However, the association between the ATM IVS 22-77 T>C genetic variant and cancer risk is controversial. Therefore, we conducted a systematic meta-analysis to estimate the overall cancer risk associated with the polymorphism and to quantify any potential between-study heterogeneity. METHODS: A total of nine studies including 4,470 cases and 4,862 controls were analyzed for ATM IVS 22-77 T>C association with cancer risk in this meta-analysis. Heterogeneity among articles and their publication bias were also tested. RESULTS: Our results showed that no association reached the level of statistical significance in the overall risk. Interestingly, in the stratified analyses, we observed an inverse relationship in lung and breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Further functional research on the ATM mechanism should be performed to explain the inconsistent results in different cancer types.

23946315
Ataxia telangiectasia presenting as dopa-responsive cervical dystonia.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the cause of cervical dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) in a Muslim Indian family inherited in an apparently autosomal recessive fashion, as previously described in this journal. METHODS: Previous testing for mutations in the genes known to cause DRD (GCH1, TH, and SPR) had been negative. Whole exome sequencing was performed on all 3 affected individuals for whom DNA was available to identify potentially pathogenic shared variants. Genotyping data obtained for all 3 affected individuals using the OmniExpress single nucleotide polymorphism chip (Illumina, San Diego, CA) were used to perform linkage analysis, autozygosity mapping, and copy number variation analysis. Sanger sequencing was used to confirm all variants. RESULTS: After filtering of the variants, exome sequencing revealed 2 genes harboring potentially pathogenic compound heterozygous variants (ATM and LRRC16A). Of these, the variants in ATM segregated perfectly with the cervical DRD. Both mutations detected in ATM have been shown to be pathogenic, and -fetoprotein, a marker of ataxia telangiectasia, was increased in all affected individuals. CONCLUSION: Biallelic mutations in ATM can cause DRD, and mutations in this gene should be considered in the differential diagnosis of unexplained DRD, particularly if the dystonia is cervical and if there is a recessive family history. ATM has previously been reported to cause isolated cervical dystonia, but never, to our knowledge, DRD. Individuals with dystonia related to ataxia telangiectasia may benefit from a trial of levodopa.

18037553
Effects of antioxidants on cancer prevention and neuromotor performance in Atm deficient mice.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by immunodeficiency, neurodegeneration and cancer. The disease results from bi-allelic mutations in the AT mutated (ATM) gene involved in cell cycle checkpoint control and repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Evidence has been accumulating that oxidative stress is associated with AT and may be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. This led to a hypothesis that antioxidants may alleviate the symptoms of AT. Consequently, several studies were conducted in Atm deficient mice to examine the role of antioxidants in cancer prevention and/or correction of neuromotor performance. N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC), EUK-189, tempol, and 5-carboxy-1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl (CTMIO) have been tested in Atm deficient mice. In contrast to other antioxidants, NAC has been used in the clinical practice for many decades and is available as a dietary supplement. In this article, we review chemoprevention studies in Atm deficient mice and, in more detail, our findings on the effect of NAC. Our short-term study showed that NAC suppressed genome rearrangements linked to cancer. The long-term study demonstrated that NAC reduced the incidence and multiplicity of lymphoma and improved some aspects of motor performance.

31762358
Cutaneous Granulomatosis and Class Switching Defect as a Presenting Sign in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: First Case from the National Iranian Registry and Review of the Literature.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immunodeficiency and cancer predisposition, caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. The clinical and immunological manifestations of A-T are very heterogeneous, especially at an early age, leading to frequent misdiagnosis. Cutaneous granulomas with unknown pathogenesis occur uncommonly in a minority of A-T patients. We herein report an unusual case of a 13-year-old girl with A-T who presented severe clinical manifestations, including multiple granulomatous lesions of the skin and a class switch defect phenotype. This patient is the first Iranian A-T case with cutaneous granulomatosis and immunodeficiency. In addition, the literature on skin granulomas in all previously reported A-T patients is reviewed indicating an increased frequency of elevated IgM level and female dominancy in this selected group of patients.

23632773
Variant ataxia telangiectasia: clinical and molecular findings and evaluation of radiosensitive phenotypes in a patient and relatives.
Variant ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) may be an underdiagnosed entity. We correlate data from radiosensitivity and kinase assays with clinical and molecular data from a patient with variant A-T and relatives. The coding region of ATM was sequenced. To evaluate the functional effect of the mutations, we performed kinase assays and developed a novel S-G2 micronucleus test. Our patient presented with mild dystonia, moderately dysarthric speech, increased serum -fetoprotein but no ataxia nor telangiectasias, no nystagmus or oculomotor dyspraxia. She has a severe IgA deficiency, but does not have recurrent infections. She is compound heterozygote for ATM c.8122G>A (p.Asp2708Asn) and c.8851-1G>T, leading to in frame loss of 63 nucleotides at the cDNA level. A trace amount of ATM protein is translated from both alleles. Residual kinase activity is derived only from the p.Asp2708Asn allele. The conventional G0 micronucleus test, based on irradiation of resting lymphocytes, revealed a radiosensitive phenotype for the patient, but not for the heterozygous relatives. As ATM is involved in homologous recombination and G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, we optimized an S-G2 micronucleus assay, allowing to evaluate micronuclei in lymphocytes irradiated in the S and G2 phases. This test showed increased radiosensitivity for both the patient and the heterozygous carriers. Intriguingly, heterozygous carriers of c.8851-1G>T (mutation associated with absence of kinase activity) showed a stronger radiosensitive phenotype with this assay than heterozygous carriers of p.Asp2708Asn (mutation associated with residual kinase activity). The modified S-G2 micronucleus assay provided phenotypic insight into complement the diagnosis of this atypical A-T patient.

21185599
Splenic infarction associated with rapidly progressive chronic lymphocytic leukemia with complex karyotype and ATM mutation.


19770270
Nonaminoglycoside compounds induce readthrough of nonsense mutations.
Large numbers of genetic disorders are caused by nonsense mutations for which compound-induced readthrough of premature termination codons (PTCs) might be exploited as a potential treatment strategy. We have successfully developed a sensitive and quantitative high-throughput screening (HTS) assay, protein transcription/translation (PTT)-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), for identifying novel PTC-readthrough compounds using ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) as a genetic disease model. This HTS PTT-ELISA assay is based on a coupled PTT that uses plasmid templates containing prototypic A-T mutated (ATM) mutations for HTS. The assay is luciferase independent. We screened approximately 34,000 compounds and identified 12 low-molecular-mass nonaminoglycosides with potential PTC-readthrough activity. From these, two leading compounds consistently induced functional ATM protein in ATM-deficient cells containing disease-causing nonsense mutations, as demonstrated by direct measurement of ATM protein, restored ATM kinase activity, and colony survival assays for cellular radiosensitivity. The two compounds also demonstrated readthrough activity in mdx mouse myotube cells carrying a nonsense mutation and induced significant amounts of dystrophin protein.

34453918
RNA sequencing combining with whole exome sequencing reveals a compound heterozygous variant in ATM in a girl with atypical ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an infrequent autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia, a tendency to malignancies and variable immunodeficiency. Here we described a 5-year-old girl with atypical A-T symptoms. And 2 different ATM variants c.5939_5948del in exon 40 and c.2639-384A>G in intron 17 were detected by whole exome sequencing (WES) combined with RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The variant spectrum of ATM was expanded. RNA-seq makes up for deficiencies of WES. We proposed a new approach, a dual-omics that combines RNA-seq with WES, for the diagnosis of genetic diseases. Moreover, our study discussed the phenotypic heterogeneity of A-T among family members as well as individuals. For children with recurrent infections and immunodeficiency, we suggested focusing on A-T after the exclusion of other potential diseases.

30772474
ATM mutation spectrum in Russian children with ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a severe autosomal recessive orphan disease characterized by a number of peculiar clinical manifestations. Genetic diagnosis of AT is complicated due to a large size of the causative gene, ATM. We used next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology for the ATM analysis in 17 children with the clinical diagnosis of AT. Biallelic mutations in the ATM gene were identified in all studied subjects; these lesions included one large gene rearrangement, which was reliably detected by NGS and validated by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). There was a pronounced founder effect, as 17 of 30 (57%) pathogenic ATM alleles in the patients of Slavic origin were represented by three recurrent mutations (c.5932G>T, c.450_453delTTCT, and c.1564_1565delGA). These data have to be taken into account while considering the genetic diagnosis and screening for ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome.

32116070
Effect of Class Switch Recombination Defect on the Phenotype of Ataxia-Telangiectasia Patients.
Objectives: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder with multisystem involvement caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene which encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase. The aims of this study were to investigate class switch recombination (CSR) and to review the clinical and immunologic phenotypes of 3 groups of A-T patients, including A-T patients with CSR defects (CSR-D), A-T patients with selective immunoglobulin A deficiency (IgA-D) and A-T patients with normal Ig level. Methods: In this study, 41 patients with confirmed diagnosis of A-T (16 A-T patients with HIgM, 15 A-T patients with IgA-D, and 10 A-T patients with normal Ig levels) from Iranian immunodeficiency registry center were enrolled. B-cell proliferation, in vitro CSR toward IgE and IgA were compared between three groups as well as G2 radiosensitivity assay. Results: Earliest presentation of telangiectasia was a significant hallmark in A-T patients with CSR-D (p =.036). In this investigation, we found that the frequency of respiratory infection (p =.002), pneumonia (p =.02), otitis media (p =.008), chronic fever (p <.001), autoimmunity (p =.02) and hepatosplenomegaly (p =.03) in A-T patients with HIgM phenotype were significantly higher than the other groups. As expected IgE production stimulation and IgA CSR were perturbed in HIgM patients that were aligned with the higher readiosenstivity scores in this group. Conclusion: A-T patients with HIgM compared to other A-T patients presenting more infections and noninfectious complications, therefore, early detection and careful management of these patients is necessary.

28746835
Genetic ataxia telangiectasia porcine model phenocopies the multisystemic features of the human disease.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a progressive multisystem autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the AT-mutated (ATM) gene. Early onset AT in children is characterized by cerebellar degeneration, leading to motor impairment. Lung disease and cancer are the two most common causes of death in AT patients. Accelerated thymic involution may contribute to the cancer, and recurrent and/or chronic respiratory infections may be a contributing factor to lung disease in AT. AT patients have fertility issues, are highly sensitive to ionizing radiation and they present oculocutaneous telangiectasia. Current treatments only slightly ameliorate disease symptoms; therapy that alters or reverses the course of the disease has not yet been discovered. Previously, we have shown that ATM(-/-) pigs, a novel model of AT, present with a loss of Purkinje cells, altered cerebellar cytoarchitecture and motor coordination deficits. ATM(-/-) porcine model not only recapitulates the neurological phenotype, but also other multifaceted clinical features of the human disease. Our current study shows that ATM(-/-) female pigs are infertile, with anatomical and functional signs of an immature reproductive system. Both male and female ATM(-/-) pigs show abnormal thymus structure with decreased cell cycle and apoptosis markers in the gland. Moreover, ATM(-/-) pigs have an altered immune system with decreased CD8(+) and increased natural killer and CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive cells. Nevertheless, ATM(-/-) pigs manifest a deficient IgG response after a viral infection. Based on the neurological and peripheral phenotypes, the ATM(-/-) pig is a novel genetic model that may be used for therapeutic assessments and to identify pathomechanisms of this disease.

34582042
Genetics of ataxia telangiectasia in a highly consanguineous population.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive multisystemic disorder. It usually presents in toddler years with progressive ataxia and oculomotor apraxia, or less commonly, in the late-first or early-second decade of life with mixed movement disorders. Biallelic mutations in ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) cause AT phenotype, a disease not well documented in Saudi Arabia, a highly consanguineous society. We studied several Saudi AT patients, identified ATM variants, and investigated associated clinical features. We included 17 patients from 12 consanguineous families. All patients had comprehensive clinical and radiological assessment, and most were examined through whole-exome sequencing (WES). Selected individuals were analyzed using various genetic approaches. We identified five different ATM variants in our patients: three previously reported mutations, and two novel variants. Nearly all patients had classical AT presentation except for two patients with a milder phenotype. Among the three known variants, a deletion causing truncation (c.381delA resulting in p.(Val128Ter)) was identified in 13 patients. Two patients harboured the other two truncating variants, (c.9001_9002delAG resulting in p.Ser3001Phefs*6) and (c.9066delA resulting in p.Glu3023Alafs*10) and two patients had novel compound heterozygous variants (NM_000051.3:Paternal Allele:c.8762C>G;p.Thr2921Arg and Maternal Allele:c.1057T>C;p.Cys353Arg). We speculate that c.381delA is a founder mutation in our population. This study provides a genotype-phenotype relationship in a previously unstudied consanguineous population. Our findings contribute to improve local clinical care, therapy, and genetic counseling.

34125542
Sensors and Inhibitors for the Detection of Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) Protein Kinase.
Recruitment and activation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase regulate multiple cell-cycle checkpoints relevant to complex biological events like DNA damage repair and apoptosis. Molecularly specific readouts of ATM using protein assays, fluorescence, or radiolabeling have advanced significantly over the past few years. This Review covers the molecular imaging techniques that enable the visualization of ATM-from traditional quantitative protein assays to the potential use of ATM inhibitors to generate new imaging agents to interrogate ATM. We are confident that molecular imaging coupled with advanced technologies will play a pivotal role in visualizing and understanding the biology of ATM and accelerate its applications in the diagnosis and monitoring of disease, including radiation therapy and patient stratification.

32918381
Evidence of pathogenicity for the leaky splice variant c.1066-6T>Gin ATM.
Mild clinical phenotypes of ataxia-telangiectasia (variant A-T) are associated with biallelic ATM variants resulting in residual function of the ATM kinase. At least one regulatory, missense, or leaky splice site mutation resulting in expression of ATM with low level kinase activity was identified in subjects with variant A-T. Studies on the pathogenicity of the germline splicing ATM variant c.1066-6T>G have provided conflicting results. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified two splice site ATM variants, c.1066-6T>G; [p.?], and c.2250G>A, [p.Ile709_Lys750del], in a compound heterozygous state in a 27-year-old woman who had been diagnosed as having congenital ocular motor apraxia type Cogan in her childhood. Reappraisal of her clinical phenotype revealed consistency with variant A-T. Functional analyses showed reduced expression of ATM protein and residual activity of the ATM kinase at a level consistent with variant A-T. Our results provide evidence for pathogenicity of the leaky ATM splice site variant c.1066-6T>G.

11243240
Recurrent ATM mutations in T-PLL on diverse haplotypes: no support for their germline origin.


18465141
Three-hit hypothesis in astrocytoma: tracing the polymorphism D1853N in ATM gene through a pedigree of the proband affected with primary brain tumor.
Ataxia telangictasia mutated (ATM) is involved in DNA repair pathway and cell-cycle checkpoints. ATM alterations were found in medulloblastomas, gliomas, but not in astrocytoma. The polymorphism D1853N was reported in healthy individuals and medulloblastomas. We could observe this polymorphism, heterozygously, in a proband affected with astrocytoma and traced it through her pedigree. We propose the three-hit hypothesis as a triangle initiators includes D1853N as a first predisposing hit, IVS 38- 63T --> A as a second hit deriving from the first somatic evolution before differentiation and IVS 38- 30 A --> G as a third hit through the development of an astrocytoma. In addition, the D1853N polymorphism was occurred in different allele from IVS 38- 63T --> A and IVS 38- 30 A --> G.

25038946
DNA repair abnormalities leading to ataxia: shared neurological phenotypes and risk factors.
Since identification of mutations in the ATM gene leading to ataxia-telangiectasia, enormous efforts have been devoted to discovering the roles this protein plays in DNA repair as well as other cellular functions. Even before the identification of ATM mutations, it was clear that other diseases with different genomic loci had very similar neurological symptoms. There has been significant progress in understanding why cancer and immunodeficiency occur in ataxia-telangiectasia even though many details remain to be determined, but the field is no closer to determining why the nervous system requires ATM and other DNA repair genes. Even though rodent disease models have similar DNA repair abnormalities as the human diseases, they have no consistent, robust neuropathological phenotype making it difficult to understand the neurological underpinnings of disease. Therefore, it may be useful to reassess the neurological and neuropathological characteristics of ataxia-telangiectasia in human patients to look for potential commonalities in DNA repair diseases that result in ataxia. In doing so, it is clear that ataxia-telangiectasia and similar diseases share neurological features other than merely ataxia, such as length-dependent motor and sensory neuropathies, and that the neuroanatomical localization for these symptoms is understood. Cells affected in ataxia-telangiectasia and similar diseases are some of the largest single nucleated cells in the body. In addition, a subset of these diseases also has extrapyramidal movements and oculomotor apraxia. These neurological and neuropathological similarities may indicate a common DNA repair related pathogenesis with very large cell size as a critical risk factor.

19459929
A proposed bailout for A-T patients?


20380744
Cutaneous granulomatosis and combined immunodeficiency revealing Ataxia-Telangiectasia: a case report.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a complex multisystem disorder characterized by progressive neurological impairment, variable immunodeficiency and oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia. A-T is a member of chromosomal breakage syndromes and it is caused by a mutation in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. Because of a wide clinical heterogeneity, A-T is often difficult to diagnose in children. We report an unusual case of a 3-year-old boy affected by A-T who presented exclusively with extensive cutaneous granulomatosis and severe combined immunodeficiency, without neurological abnormalities, at the time of diagnosis. This case clearly emphasizes the variable presentation of A-T syndrome and highlights the difficulties in the early diagnosis of A-T. A-T should be considered in children with evidence of combined humoral and cellular immunodeficiency associated with unexplained skin granulomatous lesions, even in the absence of the classic features of this syndrome.

31855653
Multiparametric cerebellar imaging and clinical phenotype in childhood ataxia telangiectasia.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia Telangiectasia (A-T) is an inherited multisystem disorder with cerebellar neurodegeneration. The relationships between imaging metrics of cerebellar health and neurological function across childhood in A-T are unknown, but may be important for determining timing and impact of therapeutic interventions. PURPOSE: To test the hypothesis that abnormalities of cerebellar structure, physiology and cellular health occur in childhood A-T and correlate with neurological disability, we performed multiparametric cerebellar MRI and establish associations with disease status in childhood A-T. METHODS: Prospective cross-sectional observational study. 22 young people (9 females / 13 males, age 6.6-17.8 years) with A-T and 24 matched healthy controls underwent 3-Tesla MRI with volumetric, diffusion and proton spectroscopic acquisitions. Participants with A-T underwent structured neurological assessment, and expression / activity of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase were recorded. RESULTS: Ataxia-telangiectasia participants had cerebellar volume loss (fractional total cerebellar volume: 5.3% vs 8.7%, P<0.0005, fractional 4th ventricular volumes: 0.19% vs 0.13%, P<0.0005), that progressed with age (fractional cerebellar volumes, r=-0.66, P=0.001), different from the control group (t=-4.88, P<0.0005). The relationship between cerebellar volume and age was similar for A-T participants with absent ATM kinase production and those producing non-functioning ATM kinase. Markers of cerebellar white matter injury were elevated in ataxia-telangiectasia vs controls (apparent diffusion coefficient: 0.8910(-3)mm(2)s(-1) vs 0.6910(-3)mm(2)s(-1), p<0.0005) and correlated (age-corrected) with neurometabolite ratios indicating impaired neuronal viability (N-acetylaspartate:creatine r=-0.70, P<0.001); gliosis (inositol:creatine r=0.50, P=0.018; combined glutamine/glutamate:creatine r=-0.55, P=0.008) and increased myelin turnover (choline:creatine r=0.68, P<0.001). Fractional 4th ventricular volume was the only variable retained in the regression model predicting neurological function (adjusted r(2)=0.29, P=0.015). CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative MRI demonstrates cerebellar abnormalities in children with A-T, providing non-invasive measures of progressive cerebellar injury and markers reflecting neurological status. These MRI metrics may be of value in determining timing and impact of interventions aimed at altering the natural history of A-T.

8886993
Ataxia-telangiectasia and the ATM gene: linking neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, and cancer to cell cycle checkpoints.
Defects in regulation of the cellular life cycle may lead to premature cellular death or malignant transformation. Most of the proteins known to be involved in these processes are mediators of mitogenic signals or components of the cell cycle machinery. It has recently become evident, however, that systems responsible for ensuring genome stability and integrity are no less important in maintaining the normal life cycle of the cell. These systems include DNA repair enzymes and a recently emerging group of proteins that alert growth regulating mechanisms to the presence of DNA damage. These signals slow down the cell cycle while DNA repair ensues. Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a genetic disorder whose clinical and cellular phenotype points to a defect in such a signaling system. A-T is characterized by neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, cancer predisposition, and defective cell cycle checkpoints. The responsible gene, ATM, was recently cloned and sequenced. ATM encodes a large protein with a region highly similar to the catalytic domain of PI 3-kinases. The ATM protein is similar to a group of proteins in various organisms which are directly involved in the cell cycle response to DNA damage. It is expected to be part of a protein complex that responds to a specific type of DNA strand break by conveying a regulatory signal to other proteins. Interestingly, the immune and nervous systems, which differ markedly in their proliferation rates, are particularly sensitive to the absence of ATM function. The identification of the ATM gene highlights the growing importance of signal transduction initiated in the nucleus rather than in the external environment, for normal cellular growth.

31691010
Trihexyphenidyl for treatment of dystonia in ataxia telangiectasia: a case report.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder caused by mutations of ATM gene. And dystonia may develop as a late manifestation in typical AT. Here we report a novel homozygous frameshift ATM mutation (c.1402_1403delAA; p. K468Efs*18) in a 10-year-old male. The patient was diagnosed as typical AT according to clinical presentations which included progressive cerebellar ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasia, immune deficiency, and cerebellar atrophy. The genetic finding confirmed the diagnosis. Severe dystonia was presented in late stage of this disease. After 3 months of trihexyphenidyl treatment, the frequency of dystonia was reduced significantly. Although dystonia is not uncommon in phenotype spectrum of AT, compared with other symptoms of this syndrome, such as cerebellar ataxia and dysarthria, dystonia can be treated.

23618812
Genetic background and tumour susceptibility in mouse models.


19322656
Differential expression of small heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) in Ataxia telangiectasia brains.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by disruption of the gene, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM). Present study was aimed at identifying proteins that are present in abnormal levels in A-T brain that may identify alternative targets for therapeutic interventions. Proteomic and Western blot analysis have shown massive expression of the small heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) in frontal cortices of A-T brains compared to negligible levels in controls. The expression of other stress proteins, Hsp70, alphaB-crystallin, and prohibitin remained unchanged in the A-T and control brains. Significant decreases in reactive oxygen species, protein carbonyl groups and lipid peroxidation products were observed in the A-T brains. There is no evidence of caspase 3 activation or DAXX mediated apoptosis. We propose that neurons in the frontal lobe are protected by the expression of Hsp27, which scavenges the oxidative stress molecules formed consequent to the primary loss of ATM function.

25258552
Ataxia-telangiectasia: future prospects.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutation in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM). ATM is a large serine/threonine protein kinase, a member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) family whose best-studied function is as master controller of signal transduction for the DNA damage response (DDR) in the event of double strand breaks (DSBs). The DDR rapidly recognizes DNA lesions and initiates the appropriate cellular programs to maintain genome integrity. This includes the coordination of cell-cycle checkpoints, transcription, translation, DNA repair, metabolism, and cell fate decisions, such as apoptosis or senescence. DSBs can be generated by exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) or various chemical compounds, such as topoisomerase inhibitors, or can be part of programmed generation and repair of DSBs via cellular enzymes needed for the generation of the antibody repertoire as well as the maturation of germ cells. AT patients have immunodeficiency, and are sterile with gonadal dysgenesis as a result of defect in meiotic recombination. In the cells of nervous system ATM has additional role in vesicle dynamics as well as in the maintenance of the epigenetic code of histone modifications. Moderate levels of ATM are associated with prolonged lifespan through resistance to oxidative stress. ATM inhibitors are being viewed as potential radiosensitizers as part of cancer radiotherapy. Though there is no cure for the disease at present, glucocorticoids have been shown to induce alternate splicing site in the gene for ATM partly restoring its activity, but their most effective timing in the disease natural history is not yet known. Gene therapy is promising but large size of the gene makes it technically difficult to be delivered across the blood-brain barrier at present. As of now, apart from glucocorticoids, use of histone deacetylase inhibitors/EZH2 to minimize effect of the absence of ATM, looks more promising.

31743320
Retrospective Diagnosis of Ataxia-Telangiectasia in an Adolescent Patient With a Remote History of T-Cell Leukemia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive cerebellar degeneration that is typically diagnosed in early childhood. A-T is associated with a predisposition to malignancies, particularly lymphoid tumors in childhood and early adulthood. An adolescent girl with minimal neurologic symptoms was diagnosed with A-T 8 years after completing therapy for T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, following a diagnosis of ATM-mutated breast cancer in her mother. We highlight the importance of recognizing ATM mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, appreciating the phenotypic heterogeneity of A-T, and defining optimal cancer screening in A-T patients.

34771661
ATM Kinase Dead: From Ataxia Telangiectasia Syndrome to Cancer.
ATM is one of the principal players of the DNA damage response. This protein exerts its role in DNA repair during cell cycle replication, oxidative stress, and DNA damage from endogenous events or exogenous agents. When is activated, ATM phosphorylates multiple substrates that participate in DNA repair, through its phosphoinositide 3-kinase like domain at the 3'end of the protein. The absence of ATM is the cause of a rare autosomal recessive disorder called Ataxia Telangiectasia characterized by cerebellar degeneration, telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, cancer susceptibility, and radiation sensitivity. There is a correlation between the severity of the phenotype and the mutations, depending on the residual activity of the protein. The analysis of patient mutations and mouse models revealed that the presence of inactive ATM, named ATM kinase-dead, is more cancer prone and lethal than its absence. ATM mutations fall into the whole gene sequence, and it is very difficult to predict the resulting effects, except for some frequent mutations. In this regard, is necessary to characterize the mutated protein to assess if it is stable and maintains some residual kinase activity. Moreover, the whole-genome sequencing of cancer patients with somatic or germline mutations has highlighted a high percentage of ATM mutations in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase domain, mostly in cancer cells resistant to classical therapy. The relevant differences between the complete absence of ATM and the presence of the inactive form in in vitro and in vivo models need to be explored in more detail to predict cancer predisposition of A-T patients and to discover new therapies for ATM-associated cancer cells. In this review, we summarize the multiple discoveries from humans and mouse models on ATM mutations, focusing into the inactive versus null ATM.

22345219
Variant ataxia-telangiectasia presenting as primary-appearing dystonia in Canadian Mennonites.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the phenotype of primary-appearing dystonia due to variant ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) with that of other dystonia ascertained for genetics research. METHODS: Movement disorder specialists examined 20 Canadian Mennonite adult probands with primary-appearing dystonia, as well as relatives in 4 families with parent-child transmission of dystonia. We screened for the exon 43 c.6200 C>A (p. A2067D) ATM mutation and mutations in DYT1 and DYT6. Clinical features of the individuals with dystonia who were harboring ATM mutations were compared with those of individuals without mutations. RESULT: Genetic analysis revealed a homozygous founder mutation in ATM in 13 members from 3 of the families, and no one harbored DYT6 or DYT1 mutations. Dystonia in ATM families mimicked other forms of early-onset primary torsion dystonia, especially DYT6, with prominent cervical, cranial, and brachial involvement. Mean age at onset was markedly younger in the patients with variant A-T (n = 12) than in patients with other dystonia (n = 23), (12 years vs 40 years, p < 0.05). The patients with A-T were remarkable for the absence of notable cerebellar atrophy on MRI, lack of frank ataxia on examination, and absence of ocular telangiectasias at original presentation, as well as the presence of prominent myoclonus-dystonia in 2 patients. Many also developed malignancies. CONCLUSION: Ataxia and telangiectasias may not be prominent features of patients with variant A-T treated for dystonia in adulthood, and variant A-T may mimic primary torsion dystonia and myoclonus-dystonia.

24747834
Brain glucose metabolism in adults with ataxia-telangiectasia and their asymptomatic relatives.
Ataxia-telangiectasia is a recessive genetic disorder (ATM is the mutated gene) of childhood with severe motor impairments and whereas homozygotes manifest the disorder, heterozygotes are asymptomatic. Structural brain imaging and post-mortem studies in individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia have reported cerebellar atrophy; but abnormalities of motor control characteristic of extrapyramidal dysfunction suggest impairment of broader motor networks. Here, we investigated possible dysfunction in other brain areas in individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia and tested for brain changes in asymptomatic relatives to assess if heterozygocity affects brain function. We used positron emission tomography and (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose to measure brain glucose metabolism (quantified as mol/100 g/min), which serves as a marker of brain function, in 10 adults with ataxia-telangiectasia, 19 non-affected adult relatives (12 siblings, seven parents) and 29 age-matched healthy controls. Statistical parametric mapping and region of interest analyses were used to compare individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia, asymptomatic relatives, and unrelated controls. We found that participants with ataxia-telangiectasia had lower metabolism in cerebellar hemispheres (14%, P < 0.001), anterior vermis (40%, P < 0.001) and fusiform gyrus (20%, P < 0.001) compared with controls or siblings, and lower metabolism in hippocampus (12%, P = 0.05) compared with controls, and showed significant intersubject variability (decreases in vermis ranged from 18% to 60%). Participants with ataxia-telangiectasia also had higher metabolism in globus pallidus (16%, P = 0.05), which correlated negatively with motor performance. Asymptomatic relatives had lower metabolism in anterior vermis (12%; P = 0.01) and hippocampus (19%; P = 0.002) than controls. Our results indicate that, in addition to the expected decrease in cerebellar metabolism, participants with ataxia-telangiectasia had widespread changes in metabolic rates including hyperactivity in globus pallidus indicative of basal ganglia involvement. Changes in basal ganglia metabolism offer potential insight into targeting strategies for therapeutic deep brain stimulation. Our finding of decreased metabolism in vermis and hippocampus of asymptomatic relatives suggests that heterozygocity influences the function of these brain regions.

34507142
Ataxia Telangiectasia iPSC line generated from a patient olfactory biopsy identifies novel disease-causing mutations.
Ataxia Telangiectasia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutated ATM gene. The most debilitating symptom of Ataxia Telangiectasia is the progressive neurodegeneration of the cerebellum, though the molecular mechanisms driving this degeneration remains unclear. Here we describe the generation and validation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from an olfactory biopsy from a patient with Ataxia Telangiectasia. Sequencing identified two previously unreported disease-causing mutations in the ATM gene. This line can be used to generate 2D and 3D patient-specific neuronal models enabling investigations into the mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration.

24683014
Radiological imaging in ataxia telangiectasia: a review.
The human genetic disorder ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is characterised by neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, cell cycle checkpoint defects, genomic instability and cancer predisposition. Progressive cerebellar ataxia represents the most debilitating aspect of this disorder. At present, there is no therapy available to cure or prevent the progressive symptoms of A-T. While it is possible to alleviate some of the symptoms associated with immunodeficiency and deficient lung function, neither the predisposition to cancer nor the progressive neurodegeneration can be prevented. Significant effort has focused on improving our understanding of various clinical, genetic and immunological aspects of A-T; however, little attention has been directed towards identifying altered brain structure and function using MRI. To date, most imaging studies have reported radiological anomalies in A-T. This review outlines the clinical and biological features of A-T along with known radiological imaging anomalies. In addition, we briefly discuss the advent of high-resolution MRI in conjunction with diffusion-weighted imaging, which enables improved investigation of the microstructural tissue environment, giving insight into the loss in integrity of motor networks due to abnormal neurodevelopmental or progressive neurodegenerative processes. Such imaging approaches have yet to be applied in the study of A-T and could provide important new information regarding the relationship between mutation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene and the integrity of motor circuitry.

23749178
Bid-ding for mercy: twisted killer in action.


34404412
Compound heterozygous variants including a novel copy number variation in a child with atypical ataxia-telangiectasia: a case report.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia is a rare autosomal recessive, neurodegenerative disorder caused by alterations in the ATM gene. The majority of ATM pathogenic variants are frameshift or nonsense variants which are predicted to truncate the whole ATM protein. Herein, we report on an ataxia telangiectasia child with atypical phenotype who was identified as compound heterozygous for two ATM variants involving a previously described pathogenic single nucleotide variation (SNV) and a novel copy number variation (CNV). CASE PRESENTATION: A 6-year-old boy presented with delayed development and oculomotor apraxia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed interval development of mild atrophy in the cerebellum. Serum alpha fetoprotein level was in normal range. Next-generation sequencing and single-nucleotide polymorphism array tests were performed. Next-generation sequencing revealed a heterozygous nonsense pathogenic variant in ATM, c.742C>T (p.Arg248Ter) inherited from the father. Single-nucleotide polymorphism array revealed a compound heterozygous CNV, arr[GRCh37] 11q22.3(10851766-108183226)1, 31460bp (exons 24-40 deletion of ATM) inherited from the mother, which was validated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis (RT-PCR). We demonstrated that this variant (NM_000051.4:c.3403_6006del) generated a product of in-frame deletion of exon 24-40 of ATM (p.Ser1135_Gln2002del). CONCLUSIONS: The compound heterozygosity for ATM variants involving a previously described pathogenic SNV and a novel CNV may be associated with the atypical clinical manifestations. This clinical report extends the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of ATM pathogenic variants in atypical ataxia-telangiectasia, thus making implementation of advanced analysis beyond the routine next-generation sequencing an important consideration in diagnosis and rehabilitation services for children with ataxia-telangiectasia.

34440406
Mechanisms Underlying the Suppression of Chromosome Rearrangements by Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated.
Chromosome rearrangements are structural variations in chromosomes, such as inversions and translocations. Chromosome rearrangements have been implicated in a variety of human diseases. Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a broad range of clinical and cellular phenotypes. At the cellular level, one of the most prominent features of A-T cells is chromosome rearrangement, especially that in T lymphocytes. The gene that is defective in A-T is ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM). The ATM protein is a serine/threonine kinase and plays a central role in the cellular response to DNA damage, particularly DNA double-strand breaks. In this review, the mechanisms by which ATM suppresses chromosome rearrangements are discussed.

34783754
Patient with ataxia telangiectasia undergoing elective staging laparoscopy: A case report and literature review.
Ataxia telangiectasia is a rare autosomal recessive condition which develops due to a mutation in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM gene). As a result of this mutation, the ability of the DNA to undergo repair is undermined. The resulting cellular demise is responsible for the diverse presentation of the clinical condition. Neurological symptoms such as cerebellar ataxia, abnormal eye movements and malignancies occur commonly, while immunodeficiency predisposes these patients to recurrent infections. Perioperative management of patients with this rare condition can be associated with increased morbidity. Therefore, it is recommended that patients with ataxia telangiectasia should be managed in a multidisciplinary centre, under the supervision of senior clinicians who have the insight into the clinical needs of such patients. We report herein, the perioperative management of a patient with ataxia telangiectasia undergoing laparoscopic procedure. This case report will allow the readers to increase their knowledge and understanding when it comes to the management of these patients.

34882376
Clinical and immunological assessment of children with ataxia telangiectasia attending Sohag university hospital in Upper Egypt.
Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) is a very rare autosomal recessive primary immune deficiency (PID) disease that affects 1 in 10,000-40,000 new births per year in the world. It is caused by biallelic mutations in ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene and characterized by a progressive cerebellar ataxia. The clinical profile of AT children in Upper Egypt in missing. Herein, we evaluated the clinical characteristics and immunological profiles of patients with AT attending Sohag University Hospital. This was a cross-sectional study, included 21 AT patients attending the Neurological and Immunological Units, Pediatric Department, Sohag University Hospital, starting April 2018 to the end of March 2019. AT represented 20.5% of all PID patients attending the hospital. The most common type of humoral immune deficiency in patients with AT was specific IgA deficiency (52.3%) followed by hypogammaglobulinemia (23.8%). Recurrent sinopulmonary infection with different degrees of severity was the common immunological problem. The most common neurological manifestations in our studied patients, other than the ataxia, were language delay and eye movement abnormalities followed by developmental delay and head nodding. None of our patients had developed malignancy till the end of the study.

31709473
Early diagnosis of ataxia telangiectasia in the neonatal phase: a parents' perspective.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder with variable immunodeficiency. Together with the Dutch A-T community, we investigated the opinion of A-T parents on an early A-T diagnosis in the asymptomatic phase of the disease. During an annual national meeting for A-T patients and families, the topic of an early A-T diagnosis was discussed in relation to the recent introduction of neonatal screening for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) in the Netherlands. Based on the discussion, individual arguments were identified and processed into a questionnaire, which was sent out to 64 A-T parents (32 families). Arguments included were insecurity to diagnosis, possible medical advantages, appropriate genetic counseling and family planning, loss of "golden" year(s), and early cancer screening for parents. The response rate was 55% (n = 35 parents). Twenty-six (74%) parents felt that the advantages of an early diagnosis outweighed the disadvantages, five parents thought that the disadvantages would outweigh the advantages (14%), and four parents did not indicate a preference.Conclusion: The majority of parents of a child with A-T would have preferred an early diagnosis during the asymptomatic phase of the disease, because the uncertainty during the diagnostic process had had a major impact on their lives. In addition, the knowledge of being carriers of an ATM gene mutation influenced decisions about family planning. Parents who opposed against an early diagnosis emphasized the joy of having a seemingly healthy child until diagnosis.What is Known: Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a devastating DNA repair disorder with a huge impact on quality of life of patients and their parents. Patients with A-T may incidentally be identified at birth as the consequence of neonatal screening for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).What is New: The majority of Dutch parents of A-T patients (74%) would have preferred an early diagnosis of their child in the asymptomatic phase of the disease. Major arguments for an early A-T diagnosis were (1) the experienced insecurity in diagnostic trajectories and its impact on families and (2) the knowledge of being ATM mutation carriers when deciding about family planning. An argument against an early diagnosis is losing the joy of having a seemingly healthy child until diagnosis.

32558426
Variant ataxia-telangiectasia in a child presenting with laryngeal dystonia.
BACKGROUND: Dystonia is a common hyperkinetic movement disorder in children; however, making an early and definitive diagnosis of dystonia can sometimes be challenging for clinicians. CASE: Herein, we report a case of a 16 years-old girl presenting with laryngeal dystonia due to compound heterozygosity of a known pathogenic and a novel variant in the ATM gene. Serum alpha-fetoprotein level was elevated. Serum IgG, IgA, IgM and IgE levels were within normal range. Treatment with L-DOPA had no benefit. Her symptoms were dramatically improved by localized botulinum toxin injections. CONCLUSION: Mutations in the ATM gene show a wide phenotypic spectrum from severe classical early-onset ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) to late-onset milder variant A-T. Our findings highlight the importance of recognizing laryngeal dystonia as one of the clinical signs of A-T.

34628594
Genetic Risk Variants for Class Switching Recombination Defects in Ataxia-Telangiectasia Patients.
BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. A-T patients manifest considerable variability in clinical and immunological features, suggesting the presence of genetic modifying factors. A striking heterogeneity has been observed in class switching recombination (CSR) in A-T patients which cannot be explained by the severity of ATM mutations. METHODS: To investigate the cause of variable CSR in A-T patients, we applied whole-exome sequencing (WES) in 20 A-T patients consisting of 10 cases with CSR defect (CSR-D) and 10 controls with normal CSR (CSR-N). Comparative analyses on modifier variants found in the exomes of these two groups of patients were performed. RESULTS: For the first time, we identified some variants in the exomes of the CSR-D group that were significantly associated with antigen processing and presentation pathway. Moreover, in this group of patients, the variants in four genes involved in DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) repair signaling, in particular, XRCC3 were observed, suggesting an association with CSR defect. CONCLUSION: Additional impact of certain variants, along with ATM mutations, may explain the heterogeneity in CSR defect phenotype among A-T patients. It can be concluded that genetic modulators play an important role in the course of A-T disease and its clinical severity.

34234451
Multidisciplinary Management of Ataxia Telangiectasia: Current Perspectives.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. In the absence of a family history, the diagnosis of A-T is usually not made until the child is older and symptomatic. Classic A-T is characterized by a constellation of clinical symptoms including progressive ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasias and sinopulmonary disease and is usually associated with absence of ATM protein. Other laboratory features associated with A-T include elevated serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and increased chromosomal breakage with in vitro exposure to ionizing radiation. Sinopulmonary symptoms can occur to varying degrees across the lifespan. Some children will also have hypogammaglobulinemia and impaired antibody responses requiring supplemental gamma globulin. People with hypomorphic ATM mutations are often considered to have mild A-T with onset of ataxia and neurological progression occurring later in life with less impairment of the immune system. The risk of malignancy, however, is significantly increased in people with either classic or mild A-T. While hematological malignancies are most common in the first two decades of life, solid organ malignancies become increasingly common during young adulthood. Deterioration of neurologic function with age is associated with dysphagia with aspiration, growth faltering, loss of ambulation and decline in pulmonary function, morbidities that contribute to shortened life expectancy and decreased quality of life. Premature death is often due to malignancies or chronic respiratory insufficiency. A-T is currently managed with supportive care and symptomatic treatment. Current clinical trials, however, represent progress and hope towards disease-modifying therapies for A-T.

24627244
Forward subtractive libraries containing genes transactivated by dexamethasone in ataxia-telangiectasia lymphoblastoid cells.
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by biallelic mutations in the AtaxiaTelangiectasia-mutated gene. A-T shows a complex phenotype ranging from early-onset progressive neurodegeneration to immunodeficiencies, high incidence of infections, and tumors. Unfortunately, no therapy is up to now available for treating this condition. Recently, the short term treatment of ataxia-telangiectasia patients with glucocorticoids was shown to improve their neurological symptoms and possibly reverse cerebellar atrophy. Thus, corticosteroids represent an attractive approach for the treatment of this neurodegenerative disease. However, the molecular mechanism involved in glucocorticoid action in A-T is yet unknown. The aim of our work is to construct cDNA libraries containing those genes which are transactivated by the glucocorticoid analogue, dexamethasone, in A-T human cells. For this purpose, suppression subtractive hybridization has been performed on ATM-null lymphoblastoid cell transcriptome extracted following drug administration. Annotation of whole genes contained in the libraries has been obtained by coupling subtractive hybridization with microarray analysis. Positive transcripts have been validated by quantitative PCR. Through in silico analyses, identified genes have been classified on the basis of the pathway in which they are involved, being able to address signaling required for dexamethasone action. Most of the induced transcripts are involved in metabolic processes and regulation of cellular processes. Our results can help to unravel the mechanism of glucocorticoid action in the reversion of A-T phenotype. Moreover, the induction of a specific region of the ATM transcript has been identified as putative biomarker predictive of dexamethasone efficacy on ataxic patients.

23436002
Clinical course of two Italian siblings with ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder.
Ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD) due to mutations in the MRE11 gene is a very rare autosomal recessive disease, described so far in only 20 patients. Little is known about the onset of the first symptoms or the clinical course of the disease. The present report contributes to the diagnosis of ATLD and its prognosis at onset. We report 30 years of clinical and ophthalmic observations and the results of quantitative magnetic resonance (MR), MR spectroscopy (proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging) and neuropsychological assessment in the first Italian siblings identified with ATLD. Although the disease had early onset and the clinical picture was initially severe, suggesting ataxia-telangiectasia, neurological impairment, ocular motor apraxia and neuropsychological tests showed very slow deterioration in adult age. The patients developed eye and head motor strategies to compensate ocular motor apraxia. MR measurements and MR spectroscopy disclosed widespread neuronal and axonal involvement. ATLD should be considered in patients with ocular apraxia and ataxia in infancy. The long follow-up provided insights into clinical outcome, with functional neuroimaging studies shedding light on the pathogenetic mechanisms of this rare disease.

34723800
A novel, ataxic mouse model of ataxia telangiectasia caused by a clinically relevant nonsense mutation.
Ataxia Telangiectasia (A-T) and Ataxia with Ocular Apraxia Type 1 (AOA1) are devastating neurological disorders caused by null mutations in the genome stability genes, A-T mutated (ATM) and Aprataxin (APTX), respectively. Our mechanistic understanding and therapeutic repertoire for treating these disorders are severely lacking, in large part due to the failure of prior animal models with similar null mutations to recapitulate the characteristic loss of motor coordination (i.e., ataxia) and associated cerebellar defects. By increasing genotoxic stress through the insertion of null mutations in both the Atm (nonsense) and Aptx (knockout) genes in the same animal, we have generated a novel mouse model that for the first time develops a progressively severe ataxic phenotype associated with atrophy of the cerebellar molecular layer. We find biophysical properties of cerebellar Purkinje neurons (PNs) are significantly perturbed (e.g., reduced membrane capacitance, lower action potential [AP] thresholds, etc.), while properties of synaptic inputs remain largely unchanged. These perturbations significantly alter PN neural activity, including a progressive reduction in spontaneous AP firing frequency that correlates with both cerebellar atrophy and ataxia over the animal's first year of life. Double mutant mice also exhibit a high predisposition to developing cancer (thymomas) and immune abnormalities (impaired early thymocyte development and T-cell maturation), symptoms characteristic of A-T. Finally, by inserting a clinically relevant nonsense-type null mutation in Atm, we demonstrate that Small Molecule Read-Through (SMRT) compounds can restore ATM production, indicating their potential as a future A-T therapeutic.

25077176
A-TWinnipeg: Pathogenesis of rare ATM missense mutation c.6200C>A with decreased protein expression and downstream signaling, early-onset dystonia, cancer, and life-threatening radiotoxicity.
We studied 10 Mennonite patients who carry the c.6200C>A missense mutation (p.A2067D) in the ATM gene, all of whom exhibited a phenotypic variant of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) that is characterized by early-onset dystonia and late-onset mild ataxia, as previously described. This report provides the pathogenetic evidence for this mutation on cellular functions. Several patients have developed cancer and subsequently experienced life-threatening adverse reactions to radiation (radiotoxicity) and/or chemotherapy. As the c.6200C>A mutation is, thus far, unique to the Mennonite population and is always associated with the same haplotype or haplovariant, it was important to rule out any possible confounding DNA variant on the same haplotype. Lymphoblastoid cells derived from Mennonite patients expressed small amounts of ATM protein, which had no autophosphorylation activity at ATM Ser1981, and trace-to-absent transphosphorylation of downstream ATM targets. A-T lymphoblastoid cells stably transfected with ATM cDNA which had been mutated for c.6200C>A did not show a detectable amount of ATM protein. The same stable cell line with mutated ATM cDNA also showed a trace-to-absent transphosphorylation of downstream ATM targets SMC1pSer966 and KAP1pSer824. From these results, we conclude that c.6200A is the disease-causing ATM mutation on this haplotype. The presence of at least trace amounts of ATM kinase activity on some immunoblots may account for the late-onset, mild ataxia of these patients. The cause of the dystonia remains unclear. Because this dystonia-ataxia phenotype is often encountered in the Mennonite population in association with cancer and adverse reactions to chemotherapy, an early diagnosis is important.

21892312
Experimental antioxidant therapy in ataxia telangiectasia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by immunodeficiency, early onset neurological degeneration, hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation and a high incidence of lymphoid cancers. The disease results from bi-allelic mutations in the AT mutated (ATM) gene involved in cell cycle checkpoint control and repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Evidence has been accumulating that oxidative stress is associated with AT and may be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. This led to a hypothesis that antioxidant therapy may mitigate the symptoms of AT, especially neurological degeneration and tumorigenesis. Consequently, several studies examined the effect of antioxidants in Atm deficient mice used as an animal model of AT. N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), EUK-189, tempol and 5-carboxy-1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl (CTMIO) have been tested for their chemopreventive properties and had some beneficial effects. In addition to antioxidants, cancer therapeutic agent dexamethasone was examined for cancer prevention in Atm deficient mice. Of the tested antioxidants, only NAC has wide clinical applications due to safety and efficacy and is available as an over-the-counter dietary supplement. In this article, we review chemoprevention studies in Atm deficient mice and, in more detail, our findings on the effect of NAC. The short-tem study showed that NAC suppressed genome rearrangements linked to cancer. The long-term study demonstrated that NAC reduced both the incidence and multiplicity of lymphoma.

31623867
Microglial Self-Recognition STINGs in A-T Neurodegeneration.
Microglial inflammation is often seen as a secondary event in neurodegeneration. A recent study by Song etal. demonstrates that loss of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activates microglia through the cytosolic DNA sensor STING. This highlights the ability of microglia to recognize and respond to self-DNA, with potentially neurotoxic consequences.

33142696
Bone Marrow Transplantation as Therapy for Ataxia-Telangiectasia: A Systematic Review.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, first reported in 1926, caused by a deficiency of ATM (Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated) protein. The disease is characterized by progressive cerebellar neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, leukemia, and lymphoma cancer predisposition. Immunoglobulin replacement, antioxidants, neuroprotective factors, growth, and anti-inflammatory hormones are commonly used for A-T treatment, but, to date, there is no known cure. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is a successful therapy for several forms of diseases and it is a valid approach for tumors, hemoglobinopathies, autoimmune diseases, inherited disorders of metabolism, and other pathologies. Some case reports of A-T patients have shown that BMT is becoming a good option, as a correct engraftment of healthy cells can restore some aspects of immunologic capacity. However, due to a high risk of mortality as a result of a clinical and cellular hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation and radiomimetic drugs, a specific non-myeloablative conditioning is required before BMT. Although BMT might be considered as one promising therapy for the treatment of immunological defects and cancer prevention in selected A-T patients, the therapy is currently not recommended or recognized and the eligibility of A-T patients for BMT is a point to deepen and deliberate.

20583220
Evaluation and management of pulmonary disease in ataxia-telangiectasia.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene, resulting in faulty repair of breakages in double-stranded DNA. The clinical phenotype is complex and is characterized by neurologic abnormalities, immunodeficiencies, susceptibility to malignancies, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, and cutaneous abnormalities. Lung disease is common in patients with A-T and often progresses with age and neurological decline. Diseases of the respiratory system cause significant morbidity and are a frequent cause of death in the A-T population. Lung disease in this population is thought to exhibit features of one or more of the following phenotypes: recurrent sinopulmonary infections with bronchiectasis, interstitial lung disease, and lung disease associated with neurological abnormalities. Here, we review available evidence and present expert opinion on the diagnosis, evaluation, and management of lung disease in A-T, as discussed in a recent multidisciplinary workshop. Although more data are emerging on this unique population, many recommendations are made based on similarities to other more well-studied diseases. Gaps in current knowledge and areas for future research in the field of pulmonary disease in A-T are also outlined.

33505696
Clinical complications and their management in a child with ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T): A case report study.
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is known as an uncommon autosomal recessive disorder associated with recurrent infections and other clinical complications. The management of its complications can improve life quality of patients.

32775531
Novel Variants in ATM Causing Mild Ataxia-Telangiectasia: From Benchside to Bedside and Back Again.


31776720
Classic ataxia-telangiectasia: the phenotype of long-term survivors.
OBJECTIVE: Patients with classic ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) generally die in the second or third decade of life. Clinical descriptions of A-T tend to focus on the symptoms at presentation. However, during the course of the disease, other symptoms and complications emerge. As long-term survivors with classic A-T develop a complex multisystem disorder with a largely unknown extent and severity, we aimed to comprehensively assess their full clinical picture. METHODS: Data from Dutch patients with classic A-T above the age of 30years were retrospectively collected. In addition, we searched the literature for descriptions of classic A-T patients who survived beyond the age of 30years. RESULTS: In the Dutch cohort, seven classic A-T patients survived beyond 30years of age. Fourteen additional patients were retrieved by the literature search. Common problems in older patients with classic A-T were linked to ageing. Most patients had pulmonary, endocrine, cardiovascular, and gastro-intestinal problems. All patients had a tetraparesis with contractures. This led to immobilization and frequent hospital admissions. Most patients expressed the wish to no longer undergo intensive medical treatments, and waived follow-up programs. CONCLUSIONS: Paucity of descriptions in the literature, and withdrawal from medical care complicate the acquisition of follow-up data on the natural history of long-term survivors. Irrespective of these limitations, we have obtained impression of the many problems that these patients face when surviving beyond 30years of age. Awareness of these problems is needed to guide follow-up, counselling, and (palliative) care; decisions about life-prolonging treatments should be well considered.

12610779
Germline p53 mutations in a cohort with childhood sarcoma: sex differences in cancer risk.
To characterize cancer risk in heterozygous p53 mutation carriers, we analyzed cancer incidence in 56 germline p53 mutation carriers and 3,201 noncarriers from 107 kindreds ascertained through patients with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma who were treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. We systematically followed members in these kindreds for cancer incidence for >20 years and evaluated their p53 gene status. We found seven kindreds with germline p53 mutations that include both missense and truncation mutation types. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between 21 missense and 35 truncation p53 mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2)=0.04; P=.84). We found a significantly higher cancer risk in female carriers than in male carriers (log-rank chi(2)=12.1; P<.001), a difference not explained by an excess of sex-specific cancer. The calculated standardized incidence ratio (SIR) showed that mutation carriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was much higher than that for the general population (SIR = 41.1; 95% confidence interval [CI] 29.9-55.0) whereas noncarriers had a risk for all types of cancer that was similar to that in the general population (SIR = 0.9; 95% CI 0.8-1.0). The calculated SIRs showed a >100-fold higher risk of sarcoma, female breast cancer, and hematologic malignancies for the p53 mutation carriers and agreed with the findings of an earlier segregation analysis based on the same cohort. These results quantitatively illustrated the spectrum of cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers and will provide valuable reference for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cancer.

12802680
Lung cancer risk in germline p53 mutation carriers: association between an inherited cancer predisposition, cigarette smoking, and cancer risk.
We recently observed a significantly increased risk for lung cancer in carriers of p53 germline mutations. Because cigarette smoking is known to play an important role in increasing the risk for lung cancer in the general population, we wanted to determine the role of cigarette smoking in lung cancer risk in people with a genetic susceptibility based on a p53 germline mutation. We studied 1263 people from 97 families enrolled in a cohort study of families systematically ascertained through childhood soft-tissue sarcoma patients treated at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, between 1944 and 1975. We assessed the incidence of lung and smoking-related cancers in 33 carriers of germline p53 mutations and in 1,230 noncarriers to determine whether there was an association between an inherited cancer predisposition, cigarette smoking, and cancer risk. We analyzed the association between cigarette smoking, mutation status, and lung and other smoking-related cancers by the Kaplan-Meier method and the Cox proportional hazards model with adjustments for birth year, race, and sex. In the hazards model, we incorporated a robust variance estimation to adjust for familial correlation. We observed an increased risk of a variety of histological types of lung cancer in the carriers of the p53 germline mutation. Mutation carriers who smoked had a 3.16-fold (95% confidence interval =1.48-6.78) higher risk for lung cancer than the mutation carriers who did not smoke. Our results demonstrate that cigarette smoking significantly increases lung cancer risk in carriers of a germline p53 mutation. This finding could be useful in designing strategies for early detection and treatment of lung and smoking-related cancers in individuals with this inherited cancer predisposition.

16912210
Joint effects of germ-line p53 mutation and sex on cancer risk in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Germ-line p53 mutations have been identified in most families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). For germ-line p53 mutation carriers, there is considerable variability with respect to age of cancer onset and tumor type, suggesting that additional genetic effects influence the clinical severity and tumor spectrum. To identify factors that might contribute to the observed heterogeneity in time to onset, we used segregation analysis to analyze the joint effects of germ-line p53 mutations and risk modifier(s) on cancer incidence. We studied 159 kindreds, ascertained through probands who had been diagnosed with childhood soft-tissue sarcoma before 16 years of age, survived >3 years after diagnosis, and treated at The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX) from 1944 to 1975. This unique cohort has been followed systematically for >20 years and has had germ-line p53 mutation testing in probands and extended family members. The analyses revealed that germ-line p53 mutations and sex had significant effects on cancer risk: men with p53 mutations had 151-fold higher odds of developing cancer than did those without mutations [95% confidence interval (95% CI), 60-380], and women with p53 mutations had 1,075-fold higher odds than did those without mutations (95% CI, 358-3,229) and 7.1-fold higher odds of having cancer than did men with mutations (95% CI, 2.5-20.3). These findings provide quantitative cancer risk assessments for LFS families.

20520810
Effects of MDM2, MDM4 and TP53 codon 72 polymorphisms on cancer risk in a cohort study of carriers of TP53 germline mutations.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that MDM2 SNP309 and p53 codon 72 have modifier effects on germline P53 mutations, but those studies relied on case-only studies with small sample sizes. The impact of MDM4 polymorphism on tumor onset in germline mutation carriers has not previously been studied. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed 213 p53 germline mutation carriers including 168(78.9%) affected with cancer and 174 who had genotypic data. We analyzed time to first cancer using Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional hazards methods, comparing risks according to polymorphism genotypes. For MDM2 SNP309, a significant difference of 9.0 years in the average age of cancer diagnosis was observed between GG/GT and TT carriers (18.6 versus 27.6 years, P = 0.0087). The hazards ratio was 1.58 (P = 0.03) comparing risks among individuals with GG/GT to risk among TT, but this effect was only significant in females (HR = 1.60, P = 0.02). Compared to other genotypes, P53 codon 72 PP homozygotes had a 2.24 times (P = 0.03) higher rate for time to develop cancer. We observed a multiplicative joint effect of MDM2 and p53 codon72 polymorphism on risk. The MDM4 polymorphism had no significant effects. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggest that the MDM2 SNP309 G allele is associated with cancer risk in p53 germline mutation carriers and accelerates time to cancer onset with a pronounced effect in females. A multiplicative joint effect exists between the MDM2 SNP309 G allele and the p53 codon 72 G allele in the risk of cancer development. Our results further define cancer risk in carriers of germline p53 mutations.

1565143
Prevalence and spectrum of germline mutations of the p53 gene among patients with sarcoma.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare inherited disorder characterized by a high risk of sarcomas of bone and soft tissue, breast cancer, and other tumors. In this report, we address the possibility that some sporadic sarcomas may be associated with new germline mutations of the p53 gene, which would not be manifested as familial cancer unless the patient survived to reproduce. METHODS: We studied DNA from peripheral leukocytes of 196 patients with sarcoma and from 200 controls. Of the 196 patients with sarcoma, 15 were selected because they had had multiple primary cancers or had a family history of cancer. The entire coding sequence and splice junctions of the p53 gene were analyzed for mutations. RESULTS: Eight germline mutations were found, three in patients with no known family history of cancer and five in patients with an unusual personal or family history of cancer. Four mutations caused amino acid substitutions, and four caused stop codons. These mutations were not present in any of the 200 controls. CONCLUSIONS: New germline mutations of the p53 gene are rare among patients with "sporadic" sarcoma but may be common in patients with sarcoma whose background includes either multiple primary cancers or a family history of cancer. Diverse mutations of this gene were associated with an increased likelihood of cancer; hence, the entire gene should be considered a target for heritable mutation. It appears that the group of patients with cancer who carry germline mutations of the p53 gene is more diverse than is suggested by the clinical definition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The identification of carriers could be of substantial clinical importance.

23894400
High frequency of germline TP53 mutations in a prospective adult-onset sarcoma cohort.
Sarcomas are a key feature of Li-Fraumeni and related syndromes (LFS/LFL), associated with germline TP53 mutations. Current penetrance estimates for TP53 mutations are subject to significant ascertainment bias. The International Sarcoma Kindred Study is a clinic-based, prospective cohort of adult-onset sarcoma cases, without regard to family history. The entire cohort was screened for mutations in TP53 using high-resolution melting analysis and Sanger sequencing, and multiplex-ligation-dependent probe amplification and targeted massively parallel sequencing for copy number changes. Pathogenic TP53 mutations were detected in blood DNA of 20/559 sarcoma probands (3.6%); 17 were germline and 3 appeared to be somatically acquired. Of the germline carriers, one appeared to be mosaic, detectable in the tumor and blood, but not epithelial tissues. Germline mutation carriers were more likely to have multiple cancers (47% vs 15% for non-carriers, P=3.010(-3)), and earlier cancer onset (33 vs 48 years, P=1.1910(-3)). The median survival of mutation carriers following first cancer diagnosis was not significantly different from non-carriers. Only 10/17 (59%) pedigrees met classical or Chompret criteria for LFS. In summary, germline TP53 mutations are not rare in adult patients with sarcoma, with implications for screening, surveillance, treatment and genetic counselling of carriers and family members.

16284780
Generation or birth cohort effect on cancer risk in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Genetic anticipation is the increased incidence, earlier onset, or increased severity of a disease in successive generations. Before the biological basis of anticipation had been demonstrated, the phenomenon was thought to be due to sampling bias, epigenetic effects, gene conversion, or recombinant events. Since then, the biologic basis for anticipation in a number of neurodegenerative disorders has been shown to be attributable to trinucleotide repeat instability, with expansion of repeats clearly correlated with an earlier age of onset. Recently, telomere shortening has been suggested as the mechanism for anticipation in the autosomal dominant form of dyskeratosis congenita, attributable to mutations in the TERC gene, leading to dysfunctional telomeres (Vulliamy et al. 2004). However, the pattern of anticipation has been observed in other disorders, including cancers, for which no genetic defect has been identified. In this study, we assess the apparent generation effect on cancer incidence in ten extended families with P53 germline mutation, identified through probands diagnosed with childhood sarcoma. The probands were from two sets of systematically ascertained sarcoma patients treated at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center between 1944 and 1982. From those overall studies, we have identified ten kindreds having germline P53 mutations in more than one generation. We compared the cancer incidence in members of successive generations of these families with P53 mutations (carriers) and with no P53 mutations (noncarriers). In carriers, cancer incidence increased in succeeding generations; there was no evidence for this effect in noncarriers; however, the noncarrier population was too small to rule it out. The apparent lack of increase in incidence in noncarriers argues against a cohort effect explaining the increase in carriers.

21837677
Sarcomas in TP53 germline mutation carriers: a review of the IARC TP53 database.
BACKGROUND: Sarcoma is the index diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial predisposition to cancer that also includes brain cancer, breast cancer, and adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline mutations in the TP53 gene are detected in approximately 80% of families that fulfill LFS criteria and in 15% to 25% of families that fulfill criteria for Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS), a group of related syndromes with broader clinical criteria. METHODS: The authors of this report used the International Agency for Research on Cancer TP53 database to analyze the types, age at onset and mutation patterns of sarcoma in TP53 mutation carriers. Those data were compared with sarcoma types in the general population of Caucasians using data from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program. RESULTS: Overall, sarcomas represented 25% of tumors in TP53 mutation carriers, and 95.6% occurred before age 50 years compared with 38.3% before age 50 years in the SEER data set. Sarcomas were more likely to be rhabdomyosarcoma in carriers aged <5 years (odds ratio [OR], 11.6; 95% confidence interval [CI], 6.1-21.9) and osteosarcoma in carriers at any age (aged <20 years: OR, 1.41; 95% CI, 1.02-1.94; age >20 years: OR, 4.61; 95% CI, 2.72-7.83). Early sarcoma (at age <20 years) was associated with missense mutations in exons encoding the DNA-binding domain of p53 protein. Conversely, p53 null mutations (frameshift, splice sites, nonsense) and mutations outside the DNA-binding domain were associated with leiomyosarcoma (OR, 10.1; 95% CI, 3.4-29.9), a type of sarcoma that occurred after age 20 years. CONCLUSIONS: The current results further demonstrated genotype-phenotype correlations and age-dependent variations in sarcoma types in carriers of germline TP53 mutations.

8839555
Genetic transmission of susceptibility to cancer in families of children with soft tissue sarcomas.
BACKGROUND: This article presents analysis of clinical and family data for 239 patients with childhood soft tissue sarcoma (STS) treated at the Institut Gustave Roussy in Villejuif. METHODS: A molecular study was performed to detect germline p53 mutations in the 44 families in which at least 1 relative developed cancer before the age of 46 or in which the proband had a second neoplasm. Mutations were found in five families. Standardized incidence ratio calculation and segregation analysis were used to study cancer occurrence in 4448 relatives, including first- and second-degree relatives and first cousins. RESULTS: An excess of brain tumors was observed in all relatives, and of breast carcinoma and STS in first-degree relatives of patients with STS. An excess of breast carcinoma was observed only in young mothers of patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. This excess might be mostly linked to the presence of a germline p53 mutation because it was no more significant when excluding families in which such a mutation existed. No association between breast carcinoma in the mother and rhabdomyosarcoma of the genitourinary tract in the proband was observed. This should be kept in mind when developing a screening strategy for breast carcinoma in mothers of patients with STS. Segregation analysis showed evidence for transmission of an autosomal dominant gene with complete penetrance by the age of 84. The genetic component was explained primarily by p53 germline mutations. CONCLUSIONS: These results show that most relatives of patients with STS are at the same risk for cancer as the general population.

27496084
Risks of first and subsequent cancers among TP53 mutation carriers in the National Cancer Institute Li-Fraumeni syndrome cohort.
BACKGROUND: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by a very high lifetime cancer risk and an early age at diagnosis of a wide cancer spectrum. Precise estimates for the risk of first and subsequent cancers are lacking. METHODS: The National Cancer Institute's Li-Fraumeni Syndrome Study includes families meeting the diagnostic criteria for LFS or Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome, and individuals with a germline TP53 mutation, choroid plexus carcinoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, or 3 cancers. Herein, we estimated the cumulative risk and annual hazards for first and second cancers among TP53 mutation carriers (TP53 positive [TP53+]) using MATLAB statistical software. RESULTS: This study evaluated 286 TP53+ individuals from 107 families. The cumulative cancer incidence was 50% by age 31 years among TP53+ females and 46 years among males, and nearly 100% by age 70 years for both sexes. Cancer risk was highest after age 20 years for females, mostly due to breast cancer, whereas among males the risk was higher in childhood and later adulthood. Among females, the cumulative incidence rates by age 70 years for breast cancer, soft tissue sarcoma, brain cancer, and osteosarcoma were 54%, 15%, 6%, and 5%, respectively. Among males, the incidence rates were 22%, 19%, and 11%, respectively, for soft tissue sarcoma, brain cancer, and osteosarcoma. Approximately 49% of those with 1 cancer developed at least another cancer after a median of 10 years. The average age-specific risk of developing a second cancer was comparable to that of developing a first cancer. CONCLUSIONS: The cumulative cancer risk in TP53+individuals was very high and varied by sex, age, and cancer type. Additional work, including prospective risk estimates, is needed to better inform personalized risk management. Cancer 2016;122:3673-81.  2016 American Cancer Society.

29165710
Risk of Soft-Tissue Sarcoma Among 69 460 Five-Year Survivors of Childhood Cancer in Europe.
BACKGROUND: Childhood cancer survivors are at risk of subsequent primary soft-tissue sarcomas (STS), but the risks of specific STS histological subtypes are unknown. We quantified the risk of STS histological subtypes after specific types of childhood cancer. METHODS: We pooled data from 13 European cohorts, yielding a cohort of 69 460 five-year survivors of childhood cancer. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) and absolute excess risks (AERs) were calculated. RESULTS: Overall, 301 STS developed compared with 19 expected (SIR = 15.7, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 14.0 to 17.6). The highest standardized incidence ratios were for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST; SIR = 40.6, 95% CI=29.6 to 54.3), leiomyosarcomas (SIR = 29.9, 95% CI=23.7 to 37.2), and fibromatous neoplasms (SIR = 12.3, 95% CI=9.3 to 16.0). SIRs for MPNST were highest following central nervous system tumors (SIR = 80.5, 95% CI=48.4 to 125.7), Hodgkin lymphoma (SIR = 81.3, 95% CI=35.1 to 160.1), and Wilms tumor (SIR = 76.0, 95% CI=27.9 to 165.4). Standardized incidence ratios for leiomyosarcoma were highest following retinoblastoma (SIR = 342.9, 95% CI=245.0 to 466.9) and Wilms tumor (SIR = 74.2, 95% CI=37.1 to 132.8). AERs for all STS subtypes were generally low at all years from diagnosis (AER < 1 per 10 000 person-years), except for leiomyosarcoma following retinoblastoma, for which the AER reached 52.7 (95% CI=20.0 to 85.5) per 10 000 person-years among patients who had survived at least 45 years from diagnosis of retinoblastoma. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we provide risk estimates of specific STS subtypes following childhood cancers and give evidence that risks of MPNSTs, leiomyosarcomas, and fibromatous neoplasms are particularly increased. While the multiplicative excess risks relative to the general population are substantial, the absolute excess risk of developing any STS subtype is low, except for leiomyosarcoma after retinoblastoma. These results are likely to be informative for both survivors and health care providers.

17192950
Analysis of germline and tumor mutations of p53 gene in familial occurrence of soft tissue sarcomas.
BACKGROUND: Familial soft tissue sarcomas are extremely rare. There is little information available on the clinical features and molecular findings of the hereditary occurrence of mesenchymal tumor. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A woman and her younger brother had malignant fibrous histiocytoma (pleomorphic type) and liposarcoma (pleomorphic type) in the lower limbs, respectively. Analysis of p53 mutations in exons 5-9 of the tumor and in germ-line was done. RESULTS: A guanine to adenine substitution occurred in CGC, codon 175 of exon 5 in p53 gene, to CAC in the tumor sample of Case 1. Likewise, a thymine to cytosine substitution occurred in TTT, codon 270 of exon 8 in p53 gene, to TCT in tumor sample of Case 2. Germline mutations were not seen in the either patients. CONCLUSIONS: Different missense mutations of p53 were detected in each tumor, however no germline mutations of p53 were found. The alteration of codon 175 in Case 1 is relatively common mutation. On the contrary, the mutation in codon 270 in Case 2 was extremely rare in cancers. Further molecular investigation is needed to understand the mechanism in familial occurrence of sarcomas.

19204208
Beyond Li Fraumeni Syndrome: clinical characteristics of families with p53 germline mutations.
PURPOSE: A clinical testing cohort was used to gain a broader understanding of the spectrum of tumors associated with germline p53 mutations to aid clinicians in identifying high-risk families. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Full sequencing of the coding exons (2 to 11) and associated splice junctions of the p53 gene was performed on 525 consecutive patients whose blood samples were submitted for diagnostic testing. Clinical features of p53 germline carriers in this cohort were characterized, clinical referral schemes based on reported p53-associated family phenotypes were evaluated, and practical mutation prevalence tables were generated. RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 91 (17%) of 525 patients submitted for testing. All families with a p53 mutation had at least one family member with a sarcoma, breast, brain, or adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC). Every individual with a choroid plexus tumor (eight of eight) and 14 of 21 individuals with a childhood ACC had a mutation regardless of family history. Based on reported personal and family history, 95% of patients (71 of 75) with a mutation met either classic Li Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) or Chompret criteria. A simplified prevalence table provides a concise summary of individual and family characteristics associated with p53 mutations. CONCLUSION: This is, to our knowledge, the largest single report of diagnostic testing for germline p53 mutations, yielding practical mutation prevalence tables and suggesting clinical utility of classic LFS and Chompret criteria for identifying a subset of cancer-prone families with p53 germline mutations, with important implications for diagnosis and management.

17136003
p53 gene gets altered by various mechanisms: studies in childhood sarcomas and retinoblastoma.
BACKGROUND: Somatic and constitutional mutation screening of p53 in childhood sarcomas and retinoblastoma was investigated by a multitechnical approach to evaluate its role in the development/progression by somatic mutation events and/or genetic predisposition. MATERIAL/METHODS: The studies were carried out on a cohort of 100 sarcoma cases, i.e. Ewing's sarcoma (n=44), osteosarcoma (n=36), and rhabdomyosarcoma (n= 20), and on 50 retinoblastoma (Rb) cases. RESULTS: Constitutional allelic deletion was found by FISH in 4% of sarcoma cases. Overall, 20% of sarcoma tumors showed p53 rearrangement by PCR/SSCP and Southern blot. Allelic deletion of p53 was detected in 78% of sarcoma and 55% of Rb tumors. p53 protein expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in 20% of sarcoma tumors. CONCLUSIONS: This study for the first time provided evidence of p53 alteration through allelic deletion that are common primary somatic mutation events which occur irrespective of grade and stage and are hence probably associated with an early phase of tumorigenesis and/or tumor progression. The studies also explored the occurrence of de novo constitutional deletion of p53 in sporadic childhood sarcomas. This study in retinoblastoma provided evidence for the synergistic role of RB1 and p53, probably essential for the full-blown development of malignancy.

28369373
Germline TP53 mutations result into a constitutive defect of p53 DNA binding and transcriptional response to DNA damage.
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutations of TP53, encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to DNA damage. We have recently shown, from a large LFS series, that dominant-negative missense mutations are the most clinically severe and, thanks to a new p53 functional assay in lymphocytes, that they alter the p53 transcriptional response to DNA damage more drastically than null mutations. In this study, we first confirmed this observation by performing the p53 functional assay in lymphocytes from 56 TP53 mutation carriers harbouring 35 distinct alterations. Then, to compare the impact of the different types of germline TP53 mutations on DNA binding, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin. ChIP-Seq performed in wild-type TP53 control lymphocytes accurately mapped 1287 p53-binding sites. New p53-binding sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-Seq analysis of LFS lymphocytes carrying TP53 null mutations (p.P152Rfs*18 or complete deletion) or the low penetrant 'Brazilian' p.R337H mutation revealed a moderate decrease of p53-binding sites (949, 580 and 620, respectively) and of ChIP-Seq peak depths. In contrast, analysis of LFS lymphocytes with TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations p.R273H or p.R248W revealed only 310 and 143 p53-binding sites, respectively, and the depths of the corresponding peaks were drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that TP53 mutation carriers exhibit a constitutive defect of the transcriptional response to DNA damage and that the clinical severity of TP53 dominant-negative missense mutations is explained by a massive and global alteration of p53 DNA binding.

22052239
Mutational analysis of p53 and PTEN in soft tissue sarcoma.
p53 and PTEN are the two most frequently mutated tumor suppressors in human cancer. However, literature on the effect of the joint inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes in soft tissue sarcoma (STS) is lacking. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether p53 and PTEN mutations play a role in the carcinogenesis of STS, as well as to evaluate their mutual role in STS pathogenesis. We screened mutations of p53 and PTEN in 86 human STSs using polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and DNA sequencing, respectively. p53 mutations were detected in 25.6% (22 out of 86) of STSs: 6 cases of p53 mutations were detected in 46 cases of specific reciprocal translocations in STSs (13.0%), 16 cases were detected in 40 cases of nonspecific reciprocal translocations in STSs (40.0%); the majority of the mutations were point mutations in exon 6-7. Furthermore, PTEN mutations were observed in 2 out of 86 STSs (2.3%). Two out of 86 cases revealed a 130th codon G>A missense mutation in exon 8 of PTEN which resulted in an Arg change to Gln in the PTEN protein structure; and a 334th codon A>T missense mutation in exon 8 of PTEN, which resulted in an Asn change to Lys in the PTEN protein structure. All subjects were examined for p53 exon 5-9 mutations and for PTEN exon 5-9 mutations. However, no tumors contained an alteration of the two genes. The findings indicate that p53 mutations may be involved in the oncogenesis of STS and also suggest that p53 may function as a potential molecular marker for distinguishing between STSs with specific reciprocal translocations and nonspecific reciprocal translocations. Although the existence of PTEN mutations in STS was detected, the PTEN mutation frequency was quite low. We conclude that PTEN may have played a less prognostic role than p53 in the development and malignant transformation of STS in the patients examined.

8710380
A novel p53 germline alteration identified in a late onset breast cancer kindred.
Germline mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, characterized by childhood sarcoma, leukemia and early onset breast cancer and has occasionally been found also in familial breast-ovarian cancer. Most mutations found are of missense type and located in the central region of the gene (exons 5 to 8). In the present study, a germline p53 alteration was identified in a late onset breast cancer family (kindred Lund 5; mean age 58 years) using single stranded conformation polymorphism and sequence analysis. The mutation (a CCG to CTG transition) at codon 82 in exon 4, resulting in a proline to leucine substitution, has not previously been reported and was not present in a control set of 60 healthy individuals. Three of five woman with breast cancer (45, 57 and 65 years) were carriers of the alteration. Loss of heterozygosity at the p53 locus was not seen in the primary tumors of these women, but appeared as a partial loss of the wildtype allele in subsequent recurrent lesions of two gene carriers. The family manifested no linkage to the p53 gene (a two-point LOD-score of -0.41), and has previously also been excluded for linkage to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 loci, as well as being carrier of a BRCA1 germline mutation. Although it seems unlikely that the p53 germline mutation is the major cause of disease predisposition in Lund 5, the data suggest that some p53 alteration may confer a subtle influence on breast cancer development and progression.

8221663
Mutations of the p53 gene are involved in Ewing's sarcomas but not in neuroblastomas.
We have investigated the frequency of p53 gene mutations in Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and neuroblastoma (NB) by using polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis for genomic DNA or complementary DNA generated from total RNA. Mutations of the p53 gene were found in six of seven ES cell lines: a missense mutation of TGC (Cys)-->TAC (Try) at codon 141 in one, a missense mutation of CGT (Arg)-->TGT (Cys) at codon 273 in one, a missense mutation of TGC (Cys)-->TTC (Phe) at codon 176 in three, and one base deletion of CGC-->CG at codon 283 in one. Further analysis of 14 ES and related primary tumors showed mutations of the p53 gene in only two: one base insertion of CCG-->CCCG at codon 152 in one and a missense mutation of GGC (Gly)-->GTC (Val) at codon 154 in the other. Both of the two tumors were obtained from patients with an advanced stage disease. Three of the eight ESs with mutations of the p53 gene showed the same missense mutation at codon 176, suggesting the mutational hot spot of the p53 gene in ESs. In contrast to ES, none of 6 NB cell lines or 48 NB tumors including advanced-stage ones with or without N-myc amplification showed any aberration of the p53 gene. Our findings suggest that mutations of the p53 gene in ES might represent late genetic events related to tumor progression, and that aberrations of the p53 gene might not be involved in the development or the progression of NB.

11059649
Screening for germline p53 mutations in pediatric and adult patients of high-risk groups in Poland.
Germline mutations of the p53 gene lead to cell transformation in various tissues. Such a complex cancer phenotype makes it difficult to recognize the carriers of the defective allele. Several studies undertaken to identify high-risk groups found germline p53 mutations in familial cancer aggregations and in patients with multiple tumors. We screened 189 pediatric and 48 adult patients. The high-risk groups comprised 41 patients with a family history of cancer and 35 with multiple neoplasms. Furthermore, 124 tumors were screened for somatic mutations. p53 exons 2 to 11 were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) followed by direct sequencing of abnormal DNA fragments. No germline p53 mutations were found and somatic mutations were detected in 5 of 59 sarcomas, globally, in 8 of 124 tumors. In conclusion, in Poland, p53 alterations do not seem very important for the predisposition to malignancy and development of sarcomas.

25925845
Germline TP53 mutational spectrum in French Canadians with breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Specific germline mutations in the hereditary breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility (HBC/HBOC) genes, BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, have been shown to recur in French Canadians of Quebec, Canada, and this has been attributed to common ancestors. Germline TP53 mutation carriers are known to segregate in Li-Fraumeni syndrome families, which feature young age of onset breast cancer. We have reported rare TP53 mutation carriers in French Canadian HBC families, though none recurred possibly due to the limited number of cancer families investigated. Here we describe TP53 germline mutations found in French Canadian cancer families provided from hereditary cancer clinics; investigate 37 new BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation-negative HBC/HBOC families for the TP53 mutations; and assess the frequency of TP53 mutations in a 1235 French Canadian breast cancer cases not selected for family history of cancer. METHODS: TP53 mutation-positive pedigrees from French Canadian cancer families were provided from local hereditary cancer clinics. Bidirectional Sanger sequencing of all protein encoding exons of TP53 was performed using peripheral blood lymphocyte DNA from breast/ovarian cancer probands from 37 HBC/HBOC families of French Canadian descent. Targeted bidirectional Sanger sequencing assay of regions containing the identified TP53 mutations was performed on 1235 French Canadian breast cancer cases not selected for family history cancer. RESULTS: Five new TP53 mutations were identified in six pedigrees from hereditary cancer clinics. No deleterious mutations were identified in cancer probands from 37 HBC/HBOC families. A targeted mutation screen of the 1235 breast cancer cases identified a c.844C>T [p.Arg282Trp] mutation carrier. This mutation was also found among the six mutation-positive cancer families provided by the local hereditary cancer clinics. The targeted screen also uncovered a new TP53 mutation, c.685T>C [p.Cys229Arg] that was found in two breast cancer cases. All TP53 mutation carriers were among the 656 women with breast cancer diagnosed less than 50 years of age. CONCLUSIONS: In all six new TP53 mutations were identified in French Canadians, where two each occurred in independently ascertained cases/families. Although all newly identified breast cancer mutation carriers reported a family history of cancer, none were consistent with features of Li-Fraumeni syndrome families.

8164043
Germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in children with osteosarcoma.
PURPOSE: We investigated the possibility that a significant proportion of children with osteosarcoma harbor germline mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and, therefore, this subgroup of pediatric cancer patients should be considered for large-scale predictive testing. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral-blood leukocytes from 235 unselected children with osteosarcoma from 33 institutions were screened for the presence of germline p53 mutations using constant denaturant gel electrophoresis (CDGE). Exons 5 through 8 were evaluated in all patients and exon 2 and exon 9 were analyzed in 59 and 95 patients, respectively. Those samples that showed aberrant migration on CDGE were sequenced or analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products to confirm the nature of the gene alteration. RESULTS: In 18 samples, CDGE showed fragments of the p53 gene with altered electrophoretic mobilities compared with wild-type p53. DNA sequencing showed that 11 samples had an identical, previously described polymorphism. The other seven contained heterozygous p53 mutations located in exon 5 (n = 3), exon 6 (n = 1), exon 7 (n = 1), and exon 8 (n = 2). Six alterations were missense mutations and one was a nonsense mutation. Three of these patients had first-degree relatives with cancer. One of these three kindreds had a family history consistent with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). CONCLUSION: We identified germline p53 mutations in seven of 235 (3.0%) children with osteosarcoma. Four of these mutations were found in patients who did not have first-degree relatives with cancer. Although genetic transmission of the altered p53 gene could not be tested in this survey because of how it was designed, it is possible that predictive testing for p53 mutations could identify unaffected relatives of gene carriers who also have a high risk for the development of cancer. This study provides evidence for the importance of considering children with osteosarcoma for predictive testing for germline p53 mutations.

11498785
Relative frequency and morphology of cancers in carriers of germline TP53 mutations.
The spectrum and frequency of cancers associated with germline TP53 mutations are uncertain. To address this issue a cohort of individuals from 28 families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, segregating germline TP53 mutations was established. Predicted cancers were estimated by applying age, morphology, site and sex-specific UK cancer statistics to person-years at risk. Observed and predicted cancers were compared and two-sided P-values calculated. Cancer types occurring to excess and showing P-values <0.02, were designated strongly associated with germline TP53 mutations. These were removed from the data and a second round of analyses performed. Cancer types with P-values <0.02 and 0.02-0.05 in the second round analyses were considered moderately and weakly associated respectively. Strongly associated cancers were: breast carcinoma, soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarcoma, brain tumours, adrenocortical carcinoma, Wilms' tumour and phyllodes tumour. Carcinoma of pancreas was moderately associated. Leukaemia and neuroblastoma were weakly associated. Other common carcinomas including lung, colon, bladder, prostate, cervix and ovary did not occur to excess. Although breast carcinoma and sarcomas were numerically most frequent, the greatest increases relative to general population rates were in adrenocortical carcinoma and phyllodes tumour. We conclude that germline TP53 mutations do not simply increase general cancer risk. There are tissue-specific effects.

9020384
Germline p53 mutation at codon 133 in a cancer-prone family.
We identified four families in which we suspected the presence of genetic factors predisposing them to cancer. We examined one family with features suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome for the presence of a germline p53 mutation in 13 of its members. To detect germline p53 mutations we performed polymerase chain reaction/nonradioisotopic single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing analysis on exons 4-9 of the p53 gene. Mutated polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was also performed on exon 5 to confirm the mutation identified by the sequencing analysis. A novel germline p53 mutation was identified at codon 133 (ATG-->AGG) in exon 5, resulting in the substitution of arginine for methionine, in all four cancer-affected individuals and in three apparently healthy individuals. We also analyzed tumor specimens for additional p53 mutations in the wild-type alleles using the same methods. However, heterozygosity was retained, and no other additional mutations in the wild-type allele were identified in any of the tumor tissues. It is possible that additional mutations in the wild-type allele are not always necessary for the loss of tumor suppressor functions. This study presents serious clinical and ethical problems about the predictive value of identifying germline p53 mutations in presymptomatic carriers. However, accurate predictive testing will be very useful in identifying unaffected individuals who are at increased risk of developing cancer and in detecting cancer at an early stage.

1423262
Mutation spectrum of the p53 gene in bone and soft tissue sarcomas.
We present here an analysis of the spectrum of mutations of the p53 gene seen in 127 bone and soft tissue sarcomas of various histological classifications. Gross rearrangements were analyzed by Southern blotting using a complementary DNA probe from the p53 gene, and subtle alterations in the entire coding sequence (exons 2 through 11) were identified by a combination of single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct genomic sequencing. A total of 42 somatic alterations of the p53 gene were found, of which 21 were gross rearrangements and 21 were subtle alterations. These included 17 cases of a single base substitution, 3 small deletions, and one single base insertion. In contrast to reported findings for other types of cancer, we found that mutations of the p53 gene in sarcomas are quite heterogeneous both in their distribution throughout the gene and in the type of genetic alterations that result. All 13 missense mutations we found occurred at highly conserved residues, whereas 8 nonsense mutations occurred at sites that spanned the gene from codons 46 to 316. Surprisingly, approximately one-half of the osteosarcomas with allelic deletions on 17p did not have detectable alterations in the coding sequence of the p53 gene.

16033918
Penetrance of adrenocortical tumours associated with the germline TP53 R337H mutation.
BACKGROUND: An inherited germline P53 mutation has been identified in cases of childhood adrenocortical carcinoma (ACT), a neoplasm with a high incidence in southern Brazil. The penetrance of ACT in carriers of the point mutation, which encodes an arginine-to-histidine substitution at codon 337 of TP53 (R337H), has not been determined. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the penetrance of childhood ACT in carriers of the R337H TP53 mutation. METHODS: The family histories of 30 kindreds of 41 southern Brazilian children with ACT were obtained. A PCR based assay was used to detect this P53 mutation in a large number of relatives of children with ACT. In all, 927 individuals were tested for the mutation, 232 from the non-carrier and 695 (including the 40 probands) from the carrier parental lines. RESULTS: 40 children with ACT carried the TP53 R337H mutation; the remaining child with ACT was not tested. There was no evidence of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in any of the kindreds; however, seven met the criteria for Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome. The carrier parental line was identified in each kindred. Of the 695 individuals tested in the carrier parental line, 240 (34.5%) were positive for the mutation, while none of the 232 individuals in the other parental line carried the mutation. The penetrance of ACT was 9.9% (95% confidence interval, 8.7% to 11.1%). CONCLUSIONS: The TP53 R337H mutation dramatically increases predisposition to childhood ACT but not to other cancers, and explains the increased frequency of ACT observed in this geographic region.

29566657
Germline breast cancer susceptibility gene mutations and breast cancer outcomes.
BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether germline breast cancer susceptibility gene mutations affect breast cancer related outcomes. We wanted to evaluate mutation patterns in 20 breast cancer susceptibility genes and correlate the mutations with clinical characteristics to determine the effects of these germline mutations on breast cancer prognosis. METHODS: The study cohort included 480 ethnic Chinese individuals in Taiwan with at least one of the six clinical risk factors for hereditary breast cancer: family history of breast or ovarian cancer, young age of onset for breast cancer, bilateral breast cancer, triple negative breast cancer, both breast and ovarian cancer, and male breast cancer. PCR-enriched amplicon-sequencing on a next generation sequencing platform was used to determine the germline DNA sequences of all exons and exon-flanking regions of the 20 genes. Protein-truncating variants were identified as pathogenic. RESULTS: We detected a 13.5% carrier rate of pathogenic germline mutations, with BRCA2 being the most prevalent and the non-BRCA genes accounting for 38.5% of the mutation carriers. BRCA mutation carriers were more likely to be diagnosed of breast cancer with lymph node involvement (66.7% vs 42.6%; P=0.011), and had significantly worse breast cancer specific outcomes. The 5-year disease-free survival was 73.3% for BRCA mutation carriers and 91.1% for non-carriers (hazard ratio for recurrence or death 2.42, 95% CI 1.29-4.53; P=0.013). After adjusting for clinical prognostic factors, BRCA mutation remained an independent poor prognostic factor for cancer recurrence or death (adjusted hazard ratio 3.04, 95% CI 1.40-6.58; P=0.005). Non-BRCA gene mutation carriers did not exhibit any significant difference in cancer characteristics or outcomes compared to those without detected mutations. Among the risk factors for hereditary breast cancer, the odds of detecting a germline mutation increased significantly with having bilateral breast cancer (adjusted odds ratio 3.27, 95% CI 1.64-6.51; P=0.0008) or having more than one risk factor (odds ratio 2.07, 95% CI 1.22-3.51; P=0.007). CONCLUSIONS: Without prior knowledge of the mutation status, BRCA mutation carriers had more advanced breast cancer on initial diagnosis and worse cancer-related outcomes. Optimal approach to breast cancer treatment for BRCA mutation carriers warrants further investigation.

10070948
Frequency of p53 mutations in breast carcinomas from Ashkenazi Jewish carriers of BRCA1 mutations.
BACKGROUND: Breast carcinomas occurring in carriers of BRCA1 gene mutations may have a distinctly different pathway of molecular pathogenesis from those occurring in noncarriers. Data from murine models implicate loss of p53 (also known as TP53) gene function as a critical early event in the malignant transformation of cells with a BRCA1 mutation. Therefore, breast tumors from BRCA1 mutation carriers might be expected to exhibit a high frequency of p53 mutations. This study examined the frequency of p53 mutations in the breast tumors of Ashkenazi Jewish carriers and noncarriers of BRCA1 mutations. METHODS: Tumor DNA from carriers and noncarriers of BRCA1 mutations was screened for mutations in exons 4 through 10 of the p53 gene by use of the polymerase chain reaction and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of the amplified DNA. Direct sequencing was performed on gene fragments that showed altered mobility in SSCP analysis. RESULTS: Mutations in the p53 gene were detected in 10 of 13 tumors from BRCA1 mutation carriers versus 10 of 33 tumors from non-carriers (two-sided P = .007). The p53 mutations were distributed throughout exons 4 through 10 and included both protein-truncating and missense mutations in both groups. CONCLUSIONS: A statistically significantly higher frequency of p53 mutations was found in breast tumors from carriers of BRCA1 mutations than from noncarriers, which adds to the accumulating evidence that loss of p53 function is an important step in the molecular pathogenesis of BRCA1 mutation-associated breast tumors. This finding may have implications for understanding phenotypic differences and potential prognostic differences between BRCA1 mutation-associated hereditary breast cancers and sporadic cancers.

22700878
Alternate splicing of the p53 inhibitor HDMX offers a superior prognostic biomarker than p53 mutation in human cancer.
Conventional high-grade osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone malignancy. Although altered expression of the p53 inhibitor HDMX (Mdmx/Mdm4) is associated with cancer risk, progression, and outcome in other tumor types, little is known about its role in osteosarcoma. High expression of the Hdmx splice variant HDMX-S relative to the full-length transcript (the HDMX-S/HDMX-FL ratio) correlates with reduced HDMX protein expression, faster progression, and poorer survival in several cancers. Here, we show that the HDMX-S/HDMX-FL ratio positively correlates with less HDMX protein expression, faster metastatic progression, and a trend to worse overall survival in osteosarcomas. We found that the HDMX-S/HDMX-FL ratio associated with common somatic genetic lesions connected with p53 inhibition, such as p53 mutation and HDM2 overexpression in osteosarcoma cell lines. Interestingly, this finding was not limited to osteosarcomas as we observed similar associations in breast cancer and a variety of other cancer cell lines, as well as in tumors from patients with soft tissue sarcoma. The HDMX-S/HDMX-FL ratio better defined patients with sarcoma with worse survival rates than p53 mutational status. We propose a novel role for alternative splicing of HDMX, whereby it serves as a mechanism by which HDMX protein levels are reduced in cancer cells that have already inhibited p53 activity. Alternative splicing of HDMX could, therefore, serve as a more effective biomarker for p53 pathway attenuation in cancers than p53 gene mutation.

29039119
Clinical implications of germline mutations in breast cancer: TP53.
PURPOSE: This review describes the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations, the risk of breast cancer and other cancers in mutation carriers and management implications for women with breast cancer and unaffected women. METHODS: Literature review of English language papers available through PubMed. RESULTS: Women who carry germline mutations in the TP53 gene have a very high risk of breast cancer of up to 85% by age 60 years. Most of these breast cancers are early onset with a median age at diagnosis of 34 years. Approximately 5-8% of women presenting with breast cancer under 30 years old have a germline TP53 gene mutation. Breast cancers in women with TP53 mutations are more likely to be hormone receptor positive and/or Her2 positive. Mastectomy is recommended over lumpectomy in TP53 mutation carriers who have breast cancer so that adjuvant breast radiotherapy can be avoided. Risk-reducing surgery should be considered due to the high contralateral breast cancer risk. Mutation carriers are at high risk of various childhood and adult-onset cancers with a very lifetime risk of malignancy, the commonest malignancies being breast cancer and soft tissue sarcoma. In unaffected female mutation carriers, MRI breast screening or risk-reducing surgery is recommended. The optimal surveillance for other cancers is currently unclear and should ideally be performed as part of a clinical trial. CONCLUSIONS: Identifying a TP53 mutation in a gene panel test is a challenging result for the patient and clinician due to the high risk of second primaries and the lack of consensus about surveillance.

17312307
Secondary sarcomas in childhood cancer survivors: a report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study.
BACKGROUND: Childhood cancer survivors are at increased risk for the development of secondary sarcomas. Exposure to radiation therapy is a known risk factor for the development of these sarcomas. Other risk factors for secondary sarcomas have not been well described for childhood cancer survivors. We analyzed a large cohort of childhood cancer survivors to determine the true incidence of secondary sarcomas and to examine factors associated with the risk of developing secondary sarcomas. METHODS: The history of secondary sarcomas in 14,372 participants in the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study was determined from self-reports in three questionnaires. Risk of secondary sarcoma was evaluated by use of standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) and excess absolute risks (EARs) as calculated by use of data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. Cox regression models were used to estimate hazard ratios of developing subsequent sarcomas. Hazard ratios were reported as relative risks (RRs). RESULTS: We identified 108 patients with sarcomas that were diagnosed a median of 11 years after the diagnosis of childhood cancer. The risk of sarcoma was more than ninefold higher among childhood cancer survivors than among the general population (SIR = 9.02, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 7.44 to 10.93). The excess absolute risk of secondary sarcoma was 32.5 per 100,000 person-years (95% CI = 26.1 to 40.3 per 100,000 person-years). Higher standardized incidence ratios and excess absolute risks were associated with young age at primary diagnosis, primary sarcoma diagnosis, and a family history of cancer. In a multivariable model, increased risk of secondary sarcoma was associated with radiation therapy (RR = 3.1, 95% CI = 1.5 to 6.2), with a primary diagnosis of sarcoma (RR = 10.1, 95% CI = 4.7 to 21.8), with a history of other secondary neoplasms (RR = 2.2, 95% CI = 1.1 to 4.5), and with treatment with higher doses of anthracyclines (RR = 2.3, 95% CI = 1.2 to 4.3) or alkylating agents (RR = 2.2, 95% CI = 1.1 to 4.6). CONCLUSION: Childhood cancer survivors appear to be at increased risk for secondary sarcomas compared with general population rates.

9140310
p53 gene mutations and p53 protein expression in human soft tissue sarcomas.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of mutation and overexpression of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in human soft tissue sarcomas. DESIGN: A total of 31 soft tissue sarcomas were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for the expression of p53 protein and were subsequently investigated by the polymerase chain reaction technique and direct sequence analysis of exons 5 through 8 in the p53 gene. SETTING: The specimens were collected over a 3-year period in the laboratories at our large teaching hospital in Seoul, Republic of Korea. PATIENTS: Thirty-one patients with soft tissue tumor were surgically treated and diagnosed as having either malignant fibrous histiocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or leiomyosarcoma. RESULTS: Overexpression of p53 was seen in 17 (55%) of 31 sarcomas, including 9 (64%) of 14 malignant fibrous histiocytomas, 4 (44%) of 9 rhabdomyosarcomas, and 4 (50%) of 8 leiomyosarcomas. Seven cases (23%) demonstrated mutations in the p53 gene. Six had a single mutation, whereas one showed triple mutations. There were seven mutations in exon 5, one in exon 6, and one in exon 7. All of the mutations were missense mutations, resulting in changes in the predicted amino acid sequence. Among the nine mutations, seven (78%) were transversions and two (22%) were transitions. CONCLUSIONS: Mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, with resultant overexpression of p53 protein, frequently occurs in human soft tissue sarcomas, supporting the role of p53 mutations in the pathogenesis of soft tissue sarcoma and the possible usefulness of p53 immunolocalization as a screening method for p53 mutations.

11219776
Germ-line p53 mutations predispose to a wide spectrum of early-onset cancers.
Germ-line p53 mutations are associated with dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), which features early-onset sarcomas of bone and soft tissues, carcinomas of the breast and adrenal cortex, brain tumors, and acute leukemias. However, carriers of germ-line p53 mutations may also be at increased risk of other cancers. To clarify the tumor spectrum associated with inherited p53 mutations, we examined cancer occurrences among our series of 45 families, plus 140 other affected cases and kindreds reported in the literature. The analyses included all cancers in patients with a germ-line p53 mutation and their first-degree relatives with nearly 50% likelihood of being a carrier. Data were abstracted on tumor types and ages at diagnosis in eligible family members, and duplicate reports were excluded. Among 738 evaluable cancers, 569 (77%) were the six tumor types (breast and adrenocortical carcinomas, sarcomas of the bone and soft tissues, brain tumors, and leukemias) associated with LFS. The remaining 169 (23%) cancers included diverse carcinomas of the lung and gastrointestinal tract, lymphomas, and other neoplasms that occurred at much earlier ages than expected in the general population. Unusually early ages at diagnosis are characteristic of hereditary cancers and suggest that carriers of germ-line p53 mutations are at increased risk of a wide range of neoplasms. Future studies addressing age-specific penetrance and site-specific cancer risks can increase the utility of LFS as a model for understanding the role of p53 alterations in carcinogenesis and for designing diagnostic and preventive interventions for the broad array of neoplasms in this syndrome.

20522432
TP53 germline mutation testing in 180 families suspected of Li-Fraumeni syndrome: mutation detection rate and relative frequency of cancers in different familial phenotypes.
BACKGROUND Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Most families fulfilling the classical diagnostic criteria harbour TP53 germline mutations. However, TP53 germline mutations may also occur in less obvious phenotypes. As a result, different criteria are in use to decide which patients qualify for TP53 mutation analysis, including the LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) and Chompret criteria. We investigated which criteria for TP53 mutation analysis resulted in the highest mutation detection rate and sensitivity in Dutch families. We describe the tumour spectrum in TP53-positive families and calculated tumour type specific relative risks. METHOD A total of 180 Dutch families referred for TP53 mutation analysis were evaluated. Tumour phenotypes were verified by pathology reports or clinical records. RESULTS A TP53 germline mutation was identified in 24 families. When the Chompret criteria were used 22/24 mutations were detected (sensitivity 92%, mutation detection rate 21%). In LFS and LFL families 18/24 mutations were found (sensitivity 75%). The two mutations detected outside the 'Chompret group' were found in a child with rhabdomyosarcoma and a young woman with breast cancer. In the mutation carriers, in addition to the classical LFS tumour types, colon and pancreatic cancer were also found significantly more often than in the general population. CONCLUSION We suggest TP53 mutation testing for all families fulfilling the Chompret criteria. In addition, TP53 mutation testing can be considered in the event of childhood sarcoma and breast cancer before 30 years. In addition to the risk for established LFS tumour types, TP53-positive individuals may also have an elevated risk for pancreatic and colon cancer.

15188174
Relative frequency and morphology of cancers in STK11 mutation carriers.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: There is limited data on the spectrum and risk for cancer associated with germline serine/threonine protein kinase 11 (STK11) mutations that cause Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). METHODS: We analyzed the incidence of cancer in 240 individuals with PJS possessing germline mutations in STK11. RESULTS: Fifty-four cancers were found among carriers. Overall, the risk for developing cancer at ages 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 years was 1%, 3%, 19%, 32%, 63%, and 81%, respectively. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed similar cancer risks between missense and truncating mutation carriers (log-rank chi(2) = 2.48; P = 0.12). There was some evidence that mutations in exon 3 of STK11 were associated with a higher cancer risk than mutations within other regions of the gene. We found no difference in overall cancer risk between male and female carriers (log-rank chi(2) = 1.31; P = 0.25) or between familial and sporadic cases (log-rank chi(2) = 1.16, with 1 df; P = 0.28). The most common cancers represented were gastrointestinal in origin--gastroesophageal, small bowel, colorectal, and pancreatic--and the risk for these cancers at ages 30, 40, 50, and 60 years was 1%, 10%, 18%, and 42%, respectively. In women, the risk for breast cancer was substantially increased, being 32% by age 60 years. CONCLUSIONS: These results quantitatively show the spectrum of cancer risk associated with STK11 germline mutations in the context of PJS and provide a valuable reference for defining surveillance regimens.

30974190
Clinical spectrum of Li-Fraumeni syndrome/Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome in Brazilian individuals with the TP53 p.R337H mutation.
BACKGROUND: The TP53 p.R337H germline mutation is highly prevalent among children with adrenocortical tumors (ACTs) from South and Southeast Brazil. However, the prevalence of other tumors of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFL) spectrum, the clinical outcomes and the potential tumor occurrence in relatives carrying this distinct TP53 mutation were not fully investigated. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated tumor profile data and outcomes of individuals and their close relatives with the TP53 p.R337H germline mutation. A questionnaire and the Toronto protocol were used for evaluation of asymptomatic carriers of this TP53 mutation. RESULTS: The cohort of this study comprised 51 patients from 46 different families; 67% were female. All but one harbored the TP53 p.R337H mutation in heterozygous state; only one child was homozygous for this variant. Maternal allele inheritance occurred in 72% of the cases (p= 0,002). In pediatric group, ACT was the most common primary tumor at the diagnosis (55%; median age= 2 years). No patient of the pediatric group who initially presented with ACT developed a second primary tumor and 11% (n= 3) died due to complications related to the primary tumor (median follow-up time of 81.5 months, range= 3-378 months). In adult group, the main tumors at diagnosis were: adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) (23%; median age= 29.5 years), breast cancer (12%; median age= 38.5 years), soft tissue sarcoma (8%; median age= 50.3 years) and choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) (2%; median age= 18 years). Among adult patients who were diagnosed with ACC as the first primary tumor, all presented with aggressive disease as per histologic and clinical criteria at diagnosis, and 75% of patients died (median follow-up time of 19 months, range= 1-69 months). Five adult patients (22%) had a second primary tumor, including bronchoalveolar lung cancer (2 cases), ACC, uterine cervical carcinoma and fibrosarcoma. The diagnosis of these tumors was established from 8 to 36 months after the first primary tumor. Three families presented more than one case of ACT. Nine malignant neoplasms were diagnosed in asymptomatic carriers using Toronto protocol. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms a high frequency of TP53 p.R337H mutation in pediatric group with ACT. In addition, we observed the occurrence of other tumors of LFS/LFL spectrum and a difference in the aggressiveness of ACTs depending on the age group in which they were diagnosed. The predominance of maternal mutated allele inheritance was first demonstrated in the affected Brazilian's families.

7966399
High frequency of germline p53 mutations in childhood adrenocortical cancer.
BACKGROUND: Adrenocortical carcinoma (ADCC) is a rare childhood cancer, affecting three of 1 million children younger than 16 years old in the United States. ADCC may be found in association with the Li-Fraumeni and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes. Children with ADCC are also at substantially increased risk of second primary cancers. Because of these associations, it is believed that the genetic basis for ADCC is stronger than for most childhood malignancies. Germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene are associated with cancer predisposition in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome as well as in individuals with sporadically occurring component tumors of the syndrome. PURPOSE: We investigated the possibility that germline TP53 gene alterations existed in children with ADCC. METHODS: Sixteen children with ADCC under the age of 18 were identified from searches of medial oncology records at three Canadian hospitals. Eleven of these 16 patients identified were alive. The mean age at diagnosis was 4.8 years (range, 1-17 years). Family histories were obtained for 11 unselected children with ADCC (six girls and five boys). Pathologic confirmation of tumor diagnosis was obtained from the medical records. Using single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis followed by single-strand DNA sequencing, genomic DNA extracted from whole blood was analyzed for the presence of TP53 mutations for six living ADCC patients. RESULTS: Three of six (50%) children were found to carry germline TP53 mutations in exons 5, 6, and 7, respectively. Both wild-type and mutant alleles were identified in all three TP53 sequences, indicating that the patients were heterozygous for germline TP53 mutations. None of these children was from a family with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The mutation in one child was shown to be inherited from the mother, who subsequently developed breast cancer. A striking excess of cancer was found in one family of a patient carrying wild-type TP53. CONCLUSIONS: Our observation of a high frequency of germline TP53 mutations in children with sporadic ADCC suggests that these children may represent probands with which to ascertain Li-Fraumeni syndrome families. It may be reasonable for children with adrenocortical carcinoma to be candidates for germline TP53 analysis. In light of the wealth of information in the Li-Fraumeni literature that associates germline TP53 mutations with a variety of malignancies, this testing may have important consequences for risk assessment for other close relatives, including early-onset breast cancer in the mothers.

7978053
Novel germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in a child with incidentally discovered adrenal cortical carcinoma.
PURPOSE: We report a case of adrenal cortical carcinoma in an infant, which was incidentally discovered by renal sonography after a urinary tract infection. The previous death of a sibling after rhabdomyosarcoma in infancy prompted a search for a heritable p53 tumor suppressor gene mutation in this family. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Starting with frozen adrenal carcinoma tissue, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification followed by direct sequencing of exons 4-8 of p53 was used to search for a mutation. When a mutation was identified in exon 6 of the tumor p53 sequence, PCR amplification and direct sequencing of exon 6 alone was then performed on DNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) of all immediate family members to determine whether a germline mutation was present. A different set of primers was used by a second laboratory at our institution to independently confirm the presence of the mutation in the adrenal carcinoma and in paraffin-embedded rhabdomyosarcoma tissue of the deceased sibling. RESULTS: A C-to-T transition was identified at a CpG site in codon 196 resulting in a change from arginine to a stop codon (CGA to TGA). The identical mutation, present as the sole p53 allele in the tumor DNA samples and in the heterozygous state with wild type p53 allele in DNA from PBLs (germline), was found in the adrenal carcinoma, the rhabdomyosarcoma, and the PBLs of the tumor-bearing child and her healthy father and 5-year-old brother. This nonsense mutation of p53 has never before been reported in the germline. The extended pedigree showed only one known additional cancer. CONCLUSIONS: A novel germline p53 mutation was identified by investigation of a sibling pair with cancers associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome in a family with an otherwise negative history for cancer. The implications of this case for identification of carriers of p53 germline mutations and their clinical management are discussed.

11519852
Absence of germline and somatic p53 alterations in children with sporadic brain tumors.
Cancers of the central nervous system are the most common solid tumors of childhood. Although somatic alterations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene have been implicated in brain tumorigenesis, the role of germline p53 mutations in the development of childhood brain tumors has not been well defined. As a component of an ongoing extensive study of the epidemiology of childhood brain tumors, we prospectively examined the germline and tumor p53 gene status in 85 children without a family history of cancer who were diagnosed with a sporadic malignant central nervous system tumor. Using PCR/single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis and direct DNA sequencing, 85 children were screened for the presence of constitutional p53 sequence alterations in exons 2 and 4 through 11. No mutations were identified. Commonly reported sequence polymorphisms were observed at codon 72, as well as in 2 other previously described nucleotide residues. Forty-four brain tumor samples were available for analysis and of these 40 were paired with peripheral blood. Once again, no p53 mutations were found. Of the 5 germline samples with the 2 common polymorphisms, only one had a paired tumor sample for comparison and the tumor contained the same alteration as the germline. Of note, one tumor, a PNET of the cerebellum (medulloblastoma), showed loss of heterozygosity at codon 72. We can conclude that the frequency of germline and somatic p53 mutations in sporadic childhood brain tumors is very low, probably less than 1%, and there is no need to screen these patients routinely for their germline p53 status. However, the potential significance of LOH at codon 72 remains to be elucidated.

8260365
p53 expression and its relationship to DNA alterations in bone and soft tissue sarcomas.
The p53 gene is one of the best studied tumour suppressor genes. Recently we performed mutation analysis on the p53 gene in a large number of bone and soft tissue sarcomas, and found that approximately one-third of the sarcomas have some type of DNA alteration at the p53 locus (Toguchida et al., 1992). However, the expression of the p53 protein resulting from these alterations still remains to be clarified. In this study, p53 expression in the sarcoma tissues was analysed immunohistochemically using antibody PAb421 (Oncogene Science) and its relationship to DNA alterations was examined. Of 113 tumours, 29 (25.7%) showed positive staining for the p53 protein. These included 19 of 67 osteosarcomas, five of 20 chondrosarcomas, four of 11 malignant fibrous histiocytomas (MFHs) and one Ewing's sarcoma. In chondrosarcomas, most of the p53-positive tumours belonged to highly malignant and atypical tumour types (dedifferentiated or mesenchymal type), suggesting a role for p53 mutation in the progression of cartilaginous tumours. All the cases with a missense mutation showed strongly positive staining, while no immunoreactivity was observed in the remaining three-quarters with DNA alterations including gross rearrangement, frame-shift mutation, nonsense mutation or mutation at splicing site except in one case. These results demonstrated the dominance of the p53 mutations with null protein expression in bone and soft tissue sarcomas, showing a unique characteristic of these types of tumours compared with other malignancies such as colon carcinomas.

23796201
Commentary on "Risks of primary extracolonic cancers following colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome." Win AK, Lindor NM, Young JP, Macrae FA, Young GP, Williamson E, Parry S, Goldblatt J, Lipton L, Winship I, Leggett B, Tucker KM, Giles GG, Buchanan DD, Clendenning M, Rosty C, Arnold J, Levine AJ, Haile RW, Gallinger S, Le Marchand L, Newcomb PA, Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Centre for Molecular, Environmental, Genetic and Analytic Epidemiology, Melbourne School of Population Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: J Natl Cancer Inst 2012;104(18):1363-72 [Epub 2012 Aug 28].
BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome is a highly penetrant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. We estimated the risks of primary cancers other than colorectal cancer following a diagnosis of colorectal cancer in mutation carriers. METHODS: We obtained data from the Colon Cancer Family Registry for 764 carriers of an MMR gene mutation (316 MLH1, 357 MSH2, 49 MSH6, and 42 PMS2), who had a previous diagnosis of colorectal cancer. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate their cumulative risk of cancers 10 and 20 years after colorectal cancer. We estimated the age-, sex-, country- and calendar period-specific standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) of cancers following colorectal cancer, compared with the general population. RESULTS: Following colorectal cancer, carriers of MMR gene mutations had the following 10-year risk of cancers in other organs: kidney, renal pelvis, ureter, and bladder (2%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1% to 3%); small intestine, stomach, and hepatobiliary tract (1%, 95% CI = 0.2% to 2%); prostate (3%, 95% CI = 1% to 5%); endometrium (12%, 95% CI = 8% to 17%); breast (2%, 95% CI = 1% to 4%); and ovary (1%, 95% CI = 0% to 2%). They were at elevated risk compared with the general population: cancers of the kidney, renal pelvis, and ureter (SIR = 12.54, 95% CI = 7.97 to 17.94), urinary bladder (SIR = 7.22, 95% CI = 4.08 to 10.99), small intestine (SIR = 72.68, 95% CI = 39.95 to 111.29), stomach (SIR = 5.65, 95% CI = 2.32 to 9.69), and hepatobiliary tract (SIR = 5.94, 95% CI = 1.81 to 10.94) for both sexes; cancer of the prostate (SIR = 2.05, 95% CI = 1.23 to 3.01), endometrium (SIR = 40.23, 95% CI = 27.91 to 56.06), breast (SIR = 1.76, 95% CI = 1.07 to 2.59), and ovary (SIR = 4.19, 95% CI = 1.28 to 7.97). CONCLUSION: Carriers of MMR gene mutations who have already had a colorectal cancer are at increased risk of a greater range of cancers than the recognized spectrum of Lynch syndrome cancers, including breast and prostate cancers.

9815715
Incidence and timing of p53 mutations during astrocytoma progression in patients with multiple biopsies.
Mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene are a genetic hallmark of human astrocytic neoplasms, but their predictive role in glioma progression is still poorly understood. We analyzed 144 biopsies from 67 patients with recurrent astrocytoma by single-strand conformation polymorphism and direct DNA sequencing. We found that 46 of 67 patients (69%) had a p53 mutation in at least one biopsy. In 41 of these (89%), the mutation was already present in the first biopsy, indicating that p53 mutations are early events in the evolution of diffuse astrocytomas. Double mutations of the p53 gene were observed in three tumors and also present from the first biopsy. Of 28 low-grade astrocytomas with a p53 mutation, 7 (25%) showed loss of the normal allele in the first biopsy. The allele status remained the same in 95% of the cases, irrespective of whether the recurrent lesion had the same or a higher grade of malignancy. Progression of low-grade astrocytomas to anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma occurred at a similar frequency in lesions with (79%) and without (63%) p53 mutations (P = 0.32), indicating that this genetic alteration is associated with tumor recurrence but not predictive of progression to a more malignant phenotype. However, the time interval until progression was shorter in patients with low-grade astrocytomas carrying a p53 mutation (P = 0.055).

7936651
A germline 2.35 kb deletion of p53 genomic DNA creating a specific loss of the oligomerization domain inherited in a Li-Fraumeni syndrome family.
The primary genetic cancer predisposing event in many Li-Fraumeni syndrome families is a germline mutation in the p53 gene. We describe an extended Li-Fraumeni family with a germline mutation in the p53 gene involving a deletion of exon 10. The mutation is a 2.35 kilobase intragenic deletion encompassing exon 10, which results in the specific loss of the entire p53 oligomerization domain. This mutation segregates with the cancer phenotype. A lymphoblastoid cell line developed from a mutation carrier shows accumulation of mutant p53 protein by immunoblotting. However, tumor tissues from two affected carriers are negative by immunohistochemical staining. A major structural alteration specifically involving the oligomerization domain of a germline p53 gene has not been previously described and occurs in a region rarely mutated in sporadic tumors. The oligomerization domain is dispensable for many wild-type p53 functions, including transactivation, sequence-specific DNA binding, and suppression of oncogenic transformation. However, the domain appears to be required for transcriptional repression, and DNA strand reassociation. The identification of this mutation in an LFS family may yield insights into the importance of the oligomerization domain for suppressor function of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.

23824362
Genetic predisposition to radiation induced sarcoma: possible role for BRCA and p53 mutations.
The estimated incidence of radiation-associated sarcoma (RAS) is 0.03-0.2% in 5years post treatment. Most cancer predisposing genes are involved in DNA repair; therefore, elevated RAS risk in these patients is plausible. Cases of angiosarcoma post breast cancer treatment were reported in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. We report the genetic evaluation of seven cases with suspected RAS from patients counseled in our cancer-genetic clinic. Of 2,885 breast cancer patient, 470 were BRCA1 or two mutation carriers and three were p53 mutation carriers. Of them seven developed sarcoma in the field of irradiation; five in the chest wall and two in other sites. Genetic evaluation revealed BRCA1 mutation in two, BRCA2 mutation in additional patient and a carrier of p53 mutation. The estimation of risk for RAS in patients with genetic predisposition is limited due to the rarity of this event, and the bias in referral to the clinic toward younger age. With these limitations the rate of RAS is 0.43% (2/470, 95% CI -0.17 to 1.02, SE=0.3) in this group in a median follow-up of 8.2years (range 1month to 51years). If we assume irradiation for the breast in 80% of the patients than rate of RAS in group is proximately 0.53% (2/376, 95% CI -0.21 to 1.26, SE=0.37). A BRCA1 carrier which had sarcoma after irradiation to head and neck carcinoma was not included in these analyses. In conclusion, we found a high frequency of BRCA1/2 mutation among our patients diagnosed with RAS. However, we estimated approximately twofold increase in the risk of RAS in BRCA1/2 carriers which was not significant compared to reports in general population. Therefore, RAS is a rare event in BRCA carriers as in the general population, and should not be considered in the decision regarding irradiation treatment in this population.

10864200
P53 germline mutations in childhood cancers and cancer risk for carrier individuals.
The family history of cancer in children treated for a solid malignant tumour in the Paediatric Oncology Department at Institute Gustave-Roussy, has been investigated. In order to determine the role of germline p53 mutations in genetic predisposition to childhood cancer, germline p53 mutations were sought in individuals with at least one relative (first- or second-degree relative or first cousin) affected by any cancer before 46 years of age, or affected by multiple cancers. Screening for germline p53 mutation was possible in 268 index cases among individuals fulfilling selection criteria. Seventeen (6.3%) mutations were identified, of which 13 were inherited and four were de novo. Using maximum likelihood methods that incorporate retrospective family data and correct for ascertainment bias, the lifetime risk of cancer for mutation carriers was estimated to be 73% for males and nearly 100% for females with a high risk of breast cancer accounting for the difference. The risk of cancer associated with such mutations is very high and no evidence of low penetrance mutation was found. These mutations are frequently inherited but de novo mutations are not rare.

9057590
p53: functions, mutations and sarcomas.
The p53 gene is the most commonly altered gene in a multitude of human cancers. The alterations can be acquired somatically or transmitted through the germ-line. Bone and soft tissue sarcomas are frequently found to have acquired abnormalities in the p53 and mdm-2 genes. In soft tissue sarcoma, the amplification of the mdm-2 gene and the binding of its oncogene product to wild-type p53 protein functionally inactivates normal p53-regulated growth. Inherited mutations of the p53 gene are associated with the rare Li-Fraumeni familial cancer syndrome. Various tumor types arise in these families, with sarcomas of the bone and soft tissues and carcinoma of the breast being the most frequently observed. Transgenic mice with highly expressed mutated p53 have a higher incidence of tumors, including predominantly osteosarcomas and soft tissue sarcomas. In close similarity with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, homozygously p53-null mice (transgenic mice carrying two non-functional p53 allele) are developmentally normal however they are susceptible to spontaneous tumor formation. This article reviews briefly the structure, function, and dysfunction of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene with particular focus on its role in the development of bone and soft tissue sarcoma.

16407375
Cancer risks in LKB1 germline mutation carriers.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Germline mutations in the LKB1 gene are known to cause Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, which is an autosomal dominant disorder characterised by hamartomatous polyposis and mucocutaneous pigmentation. This syndrome is associated with an increased risk of malignancies in different organs but there is a lack of data on cancer range and risk in LKB1 germline mutation carriers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The cumulative incidence of cancer in 149 Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients with germline mutation(s) in LKB1 was estimated using Kaplan-Meier time to cancer onset analyses and compared between relevant subgroups with log rank tests. RESULTS: Thirty two cancers were found in LKB1 mutation carriers. Overall cancer risks at ages 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 years were 6%, 18%, 31%, 41%, and 67%, respectively. There were similar overall cancer risks between male and female carriers. However, there were overall cancer risk differences for exon 6 mutation carriers versus non-exon 6 mutation carriers (log rank p=0.022 overall, 0.56 in males, 0.0000084 in females). Most (22/32) of the cancers occurred in the gastrointestinal tract, and the overall gastrointestinal cancer risks at ages 40, 50, 60, and 70 years were 12%, 24%, 34%, and 63%, respectively. In females, the risks for developing gynaecologic cancer at ages 40 and 50 years were 13% and 18%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in exon 6 of LKB1 are associated with a higher cancer risk than mutations within other regions of the gene. Moreover, this study provides age related cumulative risks of developing cancer in LKB1 mutation carriers that should be useful for developing a tailor made cancer surveillance protocol for Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients.

8730290
Phenotypic expression in von Hippel-Lindau disease: correlations with germline VHL gene mutations.
Von Hippel-Lindau disease is an autosomal dominantly inherited familial cancer syndrome predisposing to retinal and central nervous system haemangioblastomas, renal cell carcinoma, and phaeochromocytoma. VHL disease shows variable expression and interfamilial differences in predisposition to phaeochromocytoma. In a previous study of 65 VHL kindreds with defined VHL mutations we detected significant differences between VHL families with and without phaeochromocytoma such that missense mutations were more common and large deletions or protein truncating mutations less frequent in phaeochromocytoma positive families. To investigate the significance and cause of this association further, we studied 138 VHL kindreds for germline mutations and calculated the age related tumour risks for different classes of VHL gene mutations. Using SSCP, heteroduplex and Southern analysis we identified a germline VHL gene mutation in 101 families (73%). Direct sequencing of the VHL coding region further increased the mutation detection rate to 81%. In addition to precise presymptomatic diagnosis, identification of a VHL gene mutation can provide an indication of the likely phenotype. We found that large deletions and mutations predicted to cause a truncated protein were associated with a lower risk of phaeochromocytoma (6% and 9% at 30 and 50 years, respectively) than missense mutations (40% and 59%, respectively) and that missense mutations at codon 167 were associated with a high risk of phaeochromocytoma (53% and 82% at ages 30 and 50 years). Cumulative probabilities of renal cell carcinoma did not differ between the two groups (deletion/ truncation mutations: 8% and 60%, and missense mutations: 10% and 64% at ages 30 and 50 years, respectively). Age related risks for haemangioblastoma were similar in the two mutation groups, with the age related risks of cerebellar haemangioblastoma slightly less (35% and 64% v 38% and 75% at ages 30 and 50 years) and retinal haemangioblastoma slightly higher (45% and 72% v 37% and 64% at ages 30 and 50 years) in the missense mutation group than in the deletion/protein truncation group. These results provide valuable data for counselling VHL families and indicate that specific VHL mutations may be associated with different tumour susceptibility risks. There was no evidence of a generalised increase in age related tumour risks for missense mutations, suggesting that missense mutations predisposing to phaeochromocytoma have tissue specific effects, possibly because the VHL protein has several functions, the importance of which varies from tissue to tissue, or because the proteins which interact with VHL differ between different tissues.

1565144
Germline mutations of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene in children and young adults with second malignant neoplasms.
BACKGROUND: Acquired mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene have been detected in several human cancers, including colon, breast, and lung cancer. Inherited mutations (transmitted through the germline) of this gene can underlie the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare familial association of breast cancer in young women, childhood sarcomas, and other malignant neoplasms. We investigated the possibility that p53 mutations in the germline are associated with second primary cancers that arise in children and young adults who would not be considered as belonging to Li-Fraumeni families. METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood leukocytes of 59 children and young adults with a second primary cancer. The polymerase chain reaction, in combination with denaturant-gel electrophoresis and sequencing, was used to identify p53 gene mutations. RESULTS: Mutations of p53 that changed the predicted amino acid sequence were identified in leukocyte DNA from 4 of the 59 patients (6.8 percent). In three cases, the mutations were identical to ones previously found in the p53 gene. The fourth mutation was the first germline mutation to be identified in exon 9, at codon 325. Analysis of leukocyte DNA from close relatives of three of the patients indicated that the mutations were inherited, but cancer had developed in only one parent at the start of the study. CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify an important subgroup of young patients with cancer who carry germline mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene but whose family histories are not indicative of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. The early detection of such mutations would be useful not only in treating these patients, but also in identifying family members who may be at high risk for the development of tumors.

10690522
Prognostic significance of mutations to different structural and functional regions of the p53 gene in breast cancer.
Alteration to the p53 tumor suppressor gene is associated with more aggressive disease in breast cancer, as evidenced by the shortened survival of patients with mutation. Data obtained from in vitro experiments suggest that mutations to different structural and functional domains of p53 may give rise to different effects on its biological activities, notably transactivational and apoptotic properties. We evaluated the prognostic significance of various types of p53 mutation in a series of 178 tumors identified by PCR-single-strand conformational polymorphism screening as containing a mutant gene. Mutations within exon 4 were associated with particularly poor prognosis, possibly relating to the importance of this region in apoptosis. Mutations that caused denaturation of the protein structure were also associated with poor survival, again perhaps because of effects on apoptosis. In contrast, patients with mutations in the DNA contact region showed similar survival to that of patients with normal p53, suggesting a less important role for p53-mediated transactivation in determining tumor aggressiveness. Other mutation groups associated with poor prognosis were single-base substitutions and transversion mutations. Mutations in exon 6, exon 7, or the "hotspot" codons (175, 245, 248, 273) were associated with only a small reduction in patient survival compared with normal p53. These results allow some insight to be gained into the functional importance of various p53 domains in terms of their influence on overall patient survival. Further work is required to determine whether these domains are also important in influencing the response of breast tumors to adjuvant therapies.

30489631
Uterine cancer in Jewish Israeli BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.
BACKGROUND: BRCA1/2 mutation carriers have an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer, leading to the recommendation of risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) at 35-40 years of age. The role, if any, that BRCA mutations play in conferring uterine cancer risk, is unresolved. METHOD: Jewish Israeli women, carriers of one of the predominant Jewish mutations in BRCA1/2 from 1998 to 2016, were recruited. Cancer diagnoses were determined through the Israeli National Cancer Registry. Uterine cancer risk was assessed by computing the standardized incidence ratio of observed-to-expected number of cases, using the exact 2-sided P value of Poisson count. RESULTS: Overall, 2627 eligible mutation carriers were recruited from 1998 to 2016, 2312 (88%) of whom were Ashkenazi Jews (1463 BRCA1, 1154 BRCA2 mutation carriers, 10 double mutation carriers). Among these participants, 1310 underwent RRSO without hysterectomy at a mean ( standard deviation) age of 43.6 years ( 4.4 years). During 32,774 women-years of follow up, 14 women developed uterine cancer, and the observed-to-expected rate of all histological subtypes was 3.98 (95% confidence interval [CI], 2.17-6.67; P < .001). For serous papillary (n = 5), the observed-to-expected ratio was 14.29 (95% CI, 4.64-33.34; P < .001), and for sarcoma (n = 4) it was 37.74 (95% CI, 10.28-96.62). These rates were also higher than those detected in a group of 1844 age- and ethnicity-matched women (53% with breast cancer). CONCLUSION: Israeli BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers are at an increased risk for developing uterine cancer, especially serous papillary and sarcoma. These elevated risks of uterine cancer should be discussed with BRCA carriers.

22653678
Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations and history of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in families with childhood adrenocortical tumors, choroid plexus tumors, and rhabdomyosarcoma: a population-based survey.
PURPOSE: Whether childhood adrenocortical tumors (ACTs), choroid plexus tumors (CPTs), and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) are early manifestation of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is uncertain. In this study, we evaluated the frequency of germline TP53 mutations and family history in a population-based series of patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We identified children (18 years) diagnosed between 1958 and 2008 with ACT (n = 3) or CPT (n = 7), or children 5 years with RMS (n = 29). Registry-based pedigree expansion was performed. RESULTS: No patients had a family history of classic LFS but 17 fulfilled Chompret or Eeles criteria. TP53 mutations were found in 1/3 ACT patients and 1/18 RMS patients; both were novel mutations. Of five tested CPT patients none had a detectable mutation. No excess of LFS associated tumors was observed, except for breast cancer in families of CPT patients. An overall increased cancer incidence was observed in families of patients with CPT [standardized incidence ratio (SIR) = 2.0; 95% CI: 1.1-3.5] due to excess of breast and female kidney cancer and in families of patients with RMS (SIR = 1.2; 95% CI: 0.9-1.7), due to excess of early-onset melanoma and male stomach cancer. CONCLUSION: Relatives of patients with childhood ACTs, CPTs, and RMSs showed no increased risk of LFS associated tumors. However, TP53 mutations could be found in these children irrespective of family history. Absence of LFS associated tumors may suggest the presence of other cancer syndromes. Improved knowledge about relatives' cancer risks could be helpful in counseling family members of children with cancer.

7887414
Germ-line p53 mutations in 15 families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Germ-line mutations of the tumor-suppressor gene p53 have been observed in some families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), a familial cancer syndrome in which affected relatives develop a diverse set of early-onset malignancies including breast carcinoma, sarcomas, and brain tumors. The analysis of the p53 gene in LFS families has been limited, in most studies to date, to the region between exon 5 and exon 9. In order to determine the frequency and distribution of germ-line p53 mutations in LFS, we sequenced the 10 coding exons of the p53 gene in lymphocytes and fibroblast cell lines derived from 15 families with the syndrome. Germ-line mutations were observed in eight families. Six mutations were missense mutations located between exons 5 and 8. One mutation was a nonsense mutation in exon 6, and one mutation was a splicing mutation in intron 4, generating aberrant shorter p53 RNA(s). In three families, a mutation of the p53 gene was observed in the fibroblast cell line derived from the proband. However, the mutation was not found in affected relatives in two families and in the blood from the one individual, indicating that the mutation probably occurred during cell culture in vitro. In four families, no mutation was observed. This study indicates that germ-line p53 mutations in LFS are mostly located between exons 5 and 8 and that approximately 50% of patients with LFS have no germ-line mutations in the coding region of the p53 gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

17429838
High prevalence of p53 exon 4 mutations in soft tissue sarcoma.
BACKGROUND: p53 is the most commonly mutated gene in cancer, including soft tissue sarcoma (STS). The authors characterized p53 alterations (protein accumulation and gene mutation) in STS to evaluate possible associations with patient outcomes. METHODS: Thirty-one STS specimens (multiple histologies) were analyzed by p53 immunohistochemistry (IHC) and direct DNA sequencing of p53 exons 2-11 and then correlated with outcomes. RESULTS: Direct p53 sequencing detected mutations in 10 of 31 STSs; 7 of 10 were missense mutations, whereas 3 of 10 were either insertions or frameshift mutations, leading to nonfunctional truncated p53; 7 of these p53 mutations have not been previously described. Four p53 exon 4 mutations were identified, a p53 region previously unknown to be mutation prone. Eighteen of the 31 specimens expressed p53 when the authors used the clinical IHC assay of their institution. Interassay concordance of 48% was observed; only 6 of 10 sequencing-identified p53 mutated specimens exhibited nuclear p53 protein expression by IHC, whereas 12 of 18 specimens exhibiting p53 protein expression by IHC harbored sequencing-identified wild-type p53. Decreased survival was observed in STS patients bearing sequencing-identified mutated p53 versus wild-type p53, as was a correlation between IHC-determined nuclear p53 protein expression and decreased survival. CONCLUSIONS: p53 protein stabilization and p53 mutation frequently occur in STS, and both suggest worse outcomes for patients so affected. However, increased p53 protein expression does not necessarily indicate p53 gene mutation. The high incidence of exon 4 mutations found in STS suggests that p53 sequencing should not be limited to the core DNA binding domain.

25981898
TP53 germline mutation may affect response to anticancer treatments: analysis of an intensively treated Li-Fraumeni family.
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disorder associated with the occurrence of a wide spectrum of early-onset malignancies, the most prevalent being breast cancer and sarcoma. The presence of TP53 germline mutations in the majority of LFS patients suggests a genetic basis for the cancer predisposition. No special recommendations for the treatment of LFS patients have been made to date, except that of minimizing radiation. We hypothesized that TP53 germline mutations may be associated not only with cancer predisposition, but also with lack of response to chemo- and radiotherapy. Here, we present an Austrian LFS family whose members were intensively treated with chemo- and radiotherapy due to cancers that occurred at a predominantly young age, including eight breast cancers in six patients. Material from seven family members was screened for p53 mutation by Sanger sequencing and immunohistochemistry. A rare missense mutation in the tetramerization domain of exon 10 of the TP53 gene was found to segregate with malignant disease in this family. Lack of response to various chemotherapies and radiotherapy could be ascertained by histopathology of surgical specimens after neoadjuvant treatment, by cancer relapse occurring while receiving adjuvant systemic treatment and by the occurrence of second primaries in areas of adjuvant radiation. Our observations suggest that current standards of cancer treatment may not be valid for patients with LFS. In patients with TP53 germline mutation, cytotoxic treatment may bear not only the risk of tumor induction but also the risk of treatment failure.

12085209
Investigations on a clinically and functionally unusual and novel germline p53 mutation.
This report describes an individual with a rare choroid plexus papilloma in adulthood (age 29) after earlier having an osteosarcoma (age 22). The results from this study, and others, suggest that it may be advisable to consider the possibility of a germline p53 mutation in adults presenting with choroid plexus tumours. In the current study automated DNA sequencing of genomic DNA detected a novel germline 7 base pair insertion in exon 5 of the p53 gene in this patient. The alteration in frame would produce amino acid substitutions beginning with alanine to glycine at position 161 and a stop codon at position 182 in the mutated protein. Surprisingly two assays of p53 function gave apparently wild-type results on peripheral blood lymphocytes from this individual. These results led us to carry out more detailed functional tests on the mutant protein. The mutant allele was expressed either at very low levels or not at all in phytohaemagglutinin stimulated lymphocytes. Further, the mutant protein was completely non-functional in terms of its ability to transactivate a series of p53-responsive genes (p21(WAF1), bax, PIG3), to transrepress a target gene and to inhibit colony growth in transfected Saos-2 cells. However, surprisingly, data from irradiated peripheral blood lymphocytes and transfected Saos-2 cells, suggested that this truncated, mutant protein retains significant ability to induce apoptosis.

24122735
Li-Fraumeni and Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome among children diagnosed with pediatric cancer in Southern Brazil.
BACKGROUND: Pediatric cancers are a feature in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and its variant Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (LFS/LFL). To the best of the authors' knowledge, TP53 germline mutations are currently the only molecular defect known to be associated with this disease. Recently, a specific germline mutation in this gene, p.R337H, has been reported at a high prevalence in Brazil. METHODS: The prevalence of LFS/LFL was investigated in children with cancer who were diagnosed with tumors on the LFS/LFL spectrum and in a small consecutive series of controls without cancer. The prevalence of the germline p.R337H mutation and of other germline TP53 mutations was investigated in a general group of children with cancer and exclusively in children fulfilling the clinical criteria for LFS/LFL, respectively. RESULTS: Among the 65 children without cancer, 1.5% had a family history of LFL whereas of the 292 children with cancer, 25.3% had a family history of LFL (P < .001). Screening for the p.R337H mutation identified 11 carriers (3.7%), 9 of whom were diagnosed with adrenocortical carcinomas (ACC) and 2 of whom were diagnosed with choroid plexus carcinomas. One of the ACC probands was homozygous mutant. The Brazilian founder haplotype and loss of heterozygosity at the p.R337H locus were present in all carriers. In addition, direct sequencing of the entire TP53 coding region and gene rearrangement analysis of probands fulfilling the criteria for LFL (Eeles 2 criteria, Birch and/or Chompret criteria) and who were negative for the p.R337H mutation revealed a DNA-binding domain pathogenic mutation, p.G245S, in 1 child. CONCLUSIONS: TP53 p.R337H testing should be offered to Brazilian children diagnosed with ACC and choroid plexus carcinoma. A significant percentage of children with cancer in southern Brazil fulfill the criteria for LFL and should be referred for genetic risk assessment.

9146685
Genetic testing in medullary thyroid carcinoma syndromes: mutation types and clinical significance.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the types of mutations and the clinical significance of a specific genotype in familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) syndromes. DESIGN: We retrospectively and prospectively studied patients with MTC at a tertiary referral center. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study cohort consisted of 348 affected patients and at-risk family members of MTC kindreds, including 33 multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA (MEN IIA) kindreds with 165 members, 13 familial MTC alone (FMTC) kindreds (at least 4 affected members with MTC per kindred, without evidence of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism) with 108 members, 15 "other hereditary MTC" kindreds (2 or 3 affected members) with 42 members, and 33 individuals with sporadic MTC. An additional 53 subjects from the aforementioned MEN IIA kindreds who were clinically affected but not genetically tested were also included in an analysis of the relationship between genotype and phenotype. The presence of germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene was studied by DNA sequence analysis of exons 10, 11, and 13. RESULTS: Germline RET mutations in exons 10 and 11 were identified in 32 of 33 MEN IIA kindreds (97%), 10 of 13 FMTC kindreds (77%), and 10 of 15 "other hereditary MTC" kindreds (67%). No mutations were identified in exon 13. No patient with sporadic MTC had a germline mutation. In MEN IIA, codon 634 was affected in 73% of the kindreds, whereas in FMTC, the main affected codon was codon 618 (54%). In MEN IIA, patients with codon 634 mutations had a higher risk of having C-cell disease, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism than did those with other mutations (P < 0.05, P < 0.001, and P < 0.01, respectively). CONCLUSION: RET analysis is a reliable, practical, and cost-effective test in the screening of at-risk family members of MEN IIA and FMTC kindreds. In addition, RET analysis may be helpful in the follow-up of gene carriers and for the early detection of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism in patients with codon 634 mutations.

31978118
The Brazilian TP53 mutation (R337H) and sarcomas.
Sarcomas represent less than 1% of all solid neoplasms in adults and over 20% in children. Their etiology is unclear, but genetic susceptibility plays an important role in this scenario. Sarcoma is central in Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS), a familial predisposition cancer syndrome. In Brazil, the high prevalence of p.Arg337His mutations in the TP53 gene brings about a unique condition: a cluster of LFS. In the present work, we studied 502 sarcoma patients not selected by age or family history in an attempt to assess the impact of the so-called "Brazilian germline TP53 mutation" (p.Arg337His) on this tumor type. We found that 8% of patients are carriers, with leiomyosarcoma being the main histologic type of sarcoma, corresponding to 52.5% of the patients with the mutated TP53 gene. These findings emphasize the importance of genetic counseling and can better guide the management of sarcoma patients.

9587933
p53 and ras mutations in Ewing's sarcoma.
The role of tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes in the development of Ewing's sarcoma has not yet been fully clarified. In this study, we analyzed the frequency of p53 tumor suppressor gene mutation in exons 4-8 by PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing, and the expression of p53-protein in Ewing's sarcoma (ES) by using immunohistochemistry. The overexpression of MDM2, which acts as a functional inactivator of p53, was studied by immunohistochemistry. In addition, a screening for point mutations in the hot spot regions codon 12 and 13 of exon 1 and codon 61 of exon 2 of ras-genes (H-ras, N-ras, K-ras) was performed. In one case, a p53 gene mutation could be confirmed in codon 238 of exon 7 (1/24). Overexpression of MDM2 was found in five cases; in ras-genes, no mutations were detected. Compared with other highly malignant mesenchymal pediatric tumors such as osteosarcomas, mutations of p53 and ras in Ewing's sarcomas are an extraordinarily rare event. However, their frequency is comparable to that of PNET, suggesting that the low incidence of these mutations in ES and PNET could be group-specific for tumors of neuroectodermal genesis.

2488230
Genetic analysis of childhood sarcoma.
A survey of cancer in 159 3-year survivors of childhood soft tissue sarcoma and their relatives revealed a cancer excess in first-degree relatives primarily due to cancers occurring before the age of 35 years and a highly significant excess in relatives of patients with second malignant neoplasms. Tumors of soft tissue and bone, breast, and brain were in excess in relatives and as second malignant neoplasms in patients. To determine the most likely explanation for the observed cancer distribution, we applied segregation analysis under a unified version of the mixed model. The observed data were most compatible with a rare autosomal dominant gene with high penetrance (gene carriers had a 50% probability of cancer by age 30, increasing to 90% by age 60) as compared with a chance occurrence or a multifactorial explanation. We contrasted the relative odds of observing each pedigree under a sporadic, multifactorial, or major gene model, and identified 11 pedigrees in which familial clustering of cancer was significant, with the distribution of cancer strongly favoring a major gene in 9 pedigrees. The tumors in these kindreds have been associated with alterations in specific genetic loci by tumor-specific genetic analysis. In particular, we observed soft tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma and premenopausal ductal breast carcinoma tumors, perhaps attributable to loss of the Rb-1 suppressor gene on chromosome 13q, in the same patients and families. Study of the cancer predisposition segregating in 10 families by genetic linkage with markers of chromosome 13q and the Rb-1 gene have to date given negative LOD scores at 0 = 0 of Z = -1.2 to -13.0.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

1978757
Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms.
Familial cancer syndromes have helped to define the role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of cancer. The dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is of particular interest because of the diversity of childhood and adult tumors that occur in affected individuals. The rarity and high mortality of LFS precluded formal linkage analysis. The alternative approach was to select the most plausible candidate gene. The tumor suppressor gene, p53, was studied because of previous indications that this gene is inactivated in the sporadic (nonfamilial) forms of most cancers that are associated with LFS. Germ line p53 mutations have been detected in all five LFS families analyzed. These mutations do not produce amounts of mutant p53 protein expected to exert a trans-dominant loss of function effect on wild-type p53 protein. The frequency of germ line p53 mutations can now be examined in additional families with LFS, and in other cancer patients and families with clinical features that might be attributed to the mutation.

28530852
Long-Term Risk of Subsequent Malignant Neoplasms After Treatment of Childhood Cancer in the DCOG LATER Study Cohort: Role of Chemotherapy.
Purpose Childhood cancer survivors (CCSs) are at increased risk for subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMNs). We evaluated the long-term risk of SMNs in a well-characterized cohort of 5-year CCSs, with a particular focus on individual chemotherapeutic agents and solid cancer risk. Methods The Dutch Childhood Cancer Oncology Group-Long-Term Effects After Childhood Cancer cohort includes 6,165 5-year CCSs diagnosed between 1963 and 2001 in the Netherlands. SMNs were identified by linkages with the Netherlands Cancer Registry, the Dutch Pathology Registry, and medical chart review. We calculated standardized incidence ratios, excess absolute risks, and cumulative incidences. Multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression analyses were used to evaluate treatment-associated risks for breast cancer, sarcoma, and all solid cancers. Results After a median follow-up of 20.7 years (range, 5.0 to 49.8 years) since first diagnosis, 291 SMNs were ascertained in 261 CCSs (standardized incidence ratio, 5.2; 95% CI, 4.6 to 5.8; excess absolute risk, 20.3/10,000 person-years). Cumulative SMN incidence at 25 years after first diagnosis was 3.9% (95% CI, 3.4% to 4.6%) and did not change noticeably among CCSs treated in the 1990s compared with those treated earlier. We found dose-dependent doxorubicin-related increased risks of all solid cancers ( P(trend) < .001) and breast cancer ( P(trend) < .001). The doxorubicin-breast cancer dose response was stronger in survivors of Li-Fraumeni syndrome-associated childhood cancers (leukemia, CNS, and non-Ewing sarcoma) versus survivors of other cancers ( P(difference) = .008). In addition, cyclophosphamide was found to increase sarcoma risk in a dose-dependent manner ( P(trend) = .01). Conclusion The results strongly suggest that doxorubicin exposure in CCSs increases the risk of subsequent solid cancers and breast cancer, whereas cyclophosphamide exposure increases the risk of subsequent sarcomas. These results may inform future childhood cancer treatment protocols and SMN surveillance guidelines for CCSs.

9452042
A germline missense mutation R337C in exon 10 of the human p53 gene.


8118819
Prevalence and diversity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families.
The entire coding sequence of the p53 gene was analysed for the presence of mutations in 12 families conforming to a restricted definition of Li-Fraumeni syndrome (classic LFS) and nine families with features of LFS conforming to a broader definition. Mutations were detected in seven families. Six were point mutations with one each affecting codons 175, 180, and 220 and three affecting codon 248. The seventh was a deletion/insertion mutation in exon 4. Germline mutations in p53 were a feature of families which included children with rhabdomyosarcoma and/or adrenal cortical carcinoma. Germline p53 mutations were detected in six of the nine families with such tumors. An analysis of these 7 mutations, together with 34 published examples, showed that more than one-half were transitions at CpG dinucleotides, suggesting that the majority of germline p53 mutations may arise as a result of spontaneous events. The most common cancers occurring in the 41 families with germline p53 mutations, in common with classic LFS, were bone and soft tissue sarcoma, breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma, although less than one-half of the probands with germline p53 mutations came from classic LFS families. More than one-half of the cancers overall and nearly one-third of the breast cancers were diagnosed before 30 years of age. These observations have important implications for asymptomatic carriers of germline p53 mutations, and there is a need for international collaboration in the development of protocols for the management of such families.

30089713
Survival in males with glioma and gastric adenocarcinoma correlates with mutant p53 residual transcriptional activity.
BACKGROUND: There is currently no clinical distinction between different TP53 mutations, despite increasing evidence that not all mutations have equally deleterious effects on the activity of the encoded tumor suppressor protein p53. The objective of this study was to determine whether these biological differences have clinical significance. METHODS: This retrospective cohort analysis included 2,074 patients with sporadic TP53 mutations (403 unique mutations) and 1,049 germline TP53 mutation carriers (188 unique mutations). Survival was projected by stratifying patients according to their p53 mutant-specific residual transcriptional activity scores. RESULTS: Pan-cancer survival analyses revealed a strong association between increased mutant p53 residual activity and improved survival in males with glioma and gastric adenocarcinoma (P = 0.002 and P = 0.02) that was not present in the female cohorts (P = 0.16 and P = 0.50). Male glioma and gastric cancer patients with TP53 mutations resulting in >5% transcriptional activity had 3.1-fold (95% CI, 2.4-3.8; P = 0.002; multivariate analysis hazard ratio [HR]) and 4.6-fold (95% CI, 3.7-5.6; P = 0.001; multivariate analysis HR) lower risk of death as compared with patients harboring inactive (0% activity) p53 mutants. The correlation between mutant p53 residual activity with survival was recapitulated in the dataset of germline TP53 mutation carriers (HR = 3.0, 95% CI, 2.7-3.4, P < 0.001 [females]; HR = 2.2, 95% CI, 1.8-2.6, P < 0.001 [males]), where brain and gastric tumors were more common among males (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). CONCLUSION: The retention of mutant p53 transcriptional activity prognosticates superior survival for men with glioma and gastric adenocarcinoma harboring sporadic TP53 mutations. Among germline TP53 mutation carriers, increased residual transcriptional activity is correlated with prolonged lifetime cancer survival and delayed tumor onset, and males are more prone to develop brain and gastric tumors. FUNDING: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (no. 148556).

8425176
Screening for germ line p53 mutations in children with malignant tumors and a family history of cancer.
We have undertaken a routine investigation of the p53 status for all the children treated at our institution either affected by multiple tumors or whose family displays at least one second degree relative or less, affected by cancer before the age of 45 years. We report here on the first set of ten such families, eight of which were identified through a proband with sarcoma. p53 exons 5 to 8 have been sequenced following polymerase chain reaction amplification performed on DNA isolated from total blood. A missense mutation affecting codons 248, 273, and 282 was identified in three families. The mutation was inherited in these three families and was detected in unaffected members. In seven families no mutation was detected in exons 5 to 8.

20028993
Risks of Lynch syndrome cancers for MSH6 mutation carriers.
BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in MSH6 account for 10%-20% of Lynch syndrome colorectal cancers caused by hereditary DNA mismatch repair gene mutations. Because there have been only a few studies of mutation carriers, their cancer risks are uncertain. METHODS: We identified 113 families of MSH6 mutation carriers from five countries that we ascertained through family cancer clinics and population-based cancer registries. Mutation status, sex, age, and histories of cancer, polypectomy, and hysterectomy were sought from 3104 of their relatives. Age-specific cumulative risks for carriers and hazard ratios (HRs) for cancer risks of carriers, compared with those of the general population of the same country, were estimated by use of a modified segregation analysis with appropriate conditioning depending on ascertainment. RESULTS: For MSH6 mutation carriers, the estimated cumulative risks to ages 70 and 80 years, respectively, were as follows: for colorectal cancer, 22% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 14% to 32%) and 44% (95% CI = 28% to 62%) for men and 10% (95% CI = 5% to 17%) and 20% (95% CI = 11% to 35%) for women; for endometrial cancer, 26% (95% CI = 18% to 36%) and 44% (95% CI = 30% to 58%); and for any cancer associated with Lynch syndrome, 24% (95% CI = 16% to 37%) and 47% (95% CI = 32% to 66%) for men and 40% (95% CI = 32% to 52%) and 65% (95% CI = 53% to 78%) for women. Compared with incidence for the general population, MSH6 mutation carriers had an eightfold increased incidence of colorectal cancer (HR = 7.6, 95% CI = 5.4 to 10.8), which was independent of sex and age. Women who were MSH6 mutation carriers had a 26-fold increased incidence of endometrial cancer (HR = 25.5, 95% CI = 16.8 to 38.7) and a sixfold increased incidence of other cancers associated with Lynch syndrome (HR = 6.0, 95% CI = 3.4 to 10.7). CONCLUSION: We have obtained precise and accurate estimates of both absolute and relative cancer risks for MSH6 mutation carriers.

15564800
Novel germline mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1, BRCA2 and p53 gene in breast cancer patients from India.
Mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for more than 80% of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. p53 tumor suppressor gene that controls cellular growth and differentiation is also known to be mutated in more than 50% of human cancers including breast cancer. We have carried out a study on BRCA1 and BRCA2 along with p53 gene mutations in both sporadic as well as familial breast cancer patients from India where breast cancer is fast emerging as a major cancer among premenopausal urban women. We examined 124 untreated primary breast cancer patients comprising 100 sporadic and 24 familial cases including 56 age-matched healthy controls for the presence of BRCA1, BRCA2 and the p53 gene mutations using PCR-SSCP and direct nucleotide sequencing. Certain frequently mutated exons such as 2, 5, 11, 13 and 20 of BRCA1, exons 2, 9, 11 (for 6174delT), 18 and 20 of BRCA2 and 4-9 exons of p53 gene were analyzed in sporadic breast cancer while all 22 coding exons of BRCA1 including its flanking intronic regions along with above mentioned exons of BRCA2 and p53 gene were analyzed in familial breast cancer patients. We identified six patients (25%) with BRCA1 mutation of which three were found to be of novel type one in exon 16 (4956insG) and two in exon 7 (Lys110Thr) (Ser114Pro) out of 24 familial breast cancer patients studied from two different geographic regions/populations of India. Two sisters from a single family (12.5%) out of eight families from Goa with Portuguese colonial origin showed presence of founder Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1 mutation (185delAG) along with (IVS7 561-34T>C; IVS18 5271 + 66G > A). While from New Delhi, four (25%) of 16 breast cancer families showed BRCA1 mutations; a frame shift protein truncating (4956insG), a transition nonsense (Gln1395Stop) and two amino acid substitutions (Lys110Thr) and (Ser114Pro). Only one (4%) p53 mutation (Val97Ile) in its exon 4 along with BRCA1 mutation (4956insG) could be detected. No major sequence variation in BRCA2 gene was observed except for G203A at 5' UTR of exon 2, a common population polymorphism in two Goan patients who also showed silent nucleotide change for amino acid serine at codon 1436 of BRCA1 gene. None of the 100 sporadic breast cancer patients revealed any protein truncating or deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation. Interestingly, three (3%) p53 mutations in its exon 5 were detected in sporadic breast cancer patients. Although three novel BRCA1 mutations including a founder Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1 mutation were recorded in Indian women with familial breast cancer, the overall prevalence of BRCA gene mutations in Indian women with a family history of breast cancer appears to be low.

11518751
Germline p53 mutation in a patient with multiple primary cancers.
We report a case of multiple primary cancers having a germline missense mutation of the p53 gene. The patient was a Japanese female and had a history of five different types of cancers. PCR/direct sequencing analysis revealed the presence of a nucleotide substitution, AGC (Ser) to AGG (Arg), at codon 106 of the p53 gene in DNA from non-cancerous breast tissue. This is the first case of germline p53 mutation at codon 106, and could contribute to establishing correlations between the types and locations of germline p53 mutations and their phenotypical consequences.

28387921
Contribution of the TP53 R337H mutation to the cancer burden in southern Brazil: Insights from the study of 55 families of children with adrenocortical tumors.
BACKGROUND: The tumor protein p53 (TP53) arginine-to-histidine mutation at codon 337 (R337H) predisposes children to adrenocortical tumors (ACTs) and, rarely, to other childhood tumors, but its impact on adult cancer remains undetermined. The objective of this study was to investigate the frequency and types of cancer in relatives of children with ACT who carry the TP53 R337H mutation. METHODS: TP53 R337H testing was offered to relatives of probands with ACT. The parental lineage segregating the R337H mutation was identified in all families. The frequency and distribution of cancer types were compared according to R337H status. The authors' data also were compared with those publicly available for children with TP53 mutations other than R337H. RESULTS: The mean and median follow-up times for the probands with ACT were 11.2 years and 9.7 years (range, 3-32 years), respectively. During this time, cancer was diagnosed in 12 of 81 first-degree relatives (14.8%) carrying the R337H mutation but in only 1 of 94 noncarriers (1.1%; P=.0022). At age 45 years, the cumulative risk of cancer was 21% (95% confidence interval, 5%-33%) in carriers and 2% (95% confidence interval, 0%-4%) in noncarriers (P=.008). The frequency of cancer was higher in the R337H segregating lineages than in the nonsegregating lineages (249 of 1410 vs 66 of 984 individuals; P<.001). Breast and gastric cancer were the most common types. CONCLUSIONS: TP53 R337H carriers have a lifelong predisposition to cancer with a bimodal age distribution: 1 peak, represented by ACT, occurs in the first decade of life, and another peak of diverse cancer types occurs in the fifth decade. The current findings have implications for genetic counseling and surveillance of R337H carriers. Cancer 2017;123:3150-58.  2017 American Cancer Society.

1631137
Germ-line mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in patients with high risk for cancer inactivate the p53 protein.
Germ-line mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene have been observed in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, brain tumors, second malignancies, and breast cancers. It is unclear whether all of these mutations have inactivated p53 and thereby provide an increased risk for cancer. Therefore, it is necessary to establish the biological significance of these germ-line mutations by the functional and structural analysis of the resulting mutant p53 proteins. We analyzed the ability of seven germ-line mutant proteins observed in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, second primary neoplasms, or familial breast cancer to block the growth of malignant cells and compared the structural properties of the mutant proteins to that of the wild-type protein. Six of seven missense mutations disrupted the growth inhibitory properties and structure of the wild-type protein. One germ-line mutation retained the features of the wild-type p53. Genetic analysis of the breast cancer family in which this mutation was observed indicated that this germ-line mutation was not associated with the development of cancer. These results demonstrate that germ-line p53 mutations observed in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and with second malignancies have inactivated the p53 tumor suppressor gene. The inability of the germ-line p53 mutants to block the growth of malignant cells can explain why patients with these germ-line mutations have an increased risk for cancer. The observation of a functionally silent germ-line mutation indicates that, before associating a germ-line tumor suppressor gene mutation with cancer risk, it is prudent to consider its functional significance.

10589767
Characterization of p53 mutations in colorectal liver metastases and correlation with clinical parameters.
The presence and type of mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene were determined in 40 patients undergoing curative hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal carcinoma. This represents the largest series in the literature on the screening of p53 mutations for liver metastases. The analysis was performed in exons 5-9 by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis followed by direct sequencing. Forty-five percent of tumors showed mutation in p53, and this was observed only in exons 5-8. Mutations at codon positions 167, 196, 204, 213, 245, 281, 282, 286, and 306; deletion of codon 251 and of the first nucleotide of codon 252; and Leu residue (CTC) insertion downstream codon 252 are reported for the first time in colorectal liver metastasis. Mutations at codon positions 163, 248, and 273 have been reported previously. Correlation of p53 status with clinical parameters showed that patients with mutated p53 had a statistically higher number of lesions when compared with patients with wild-type p53 (P<0.050). In particular, of patients with mutated p53, 41% had three or more metastases compared with 14% of patients with wild-type p53. Synchronous metastases were present in 70% of the patients with p53 mutations and in only 29% of patients with wild-type p53 (P<0.025). In addition, patients with p53 mutations are more likely to develop recurrence (73%) compared with patients with wild-type p53 (33%; P<0.001). Other factors considered, including preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen level, bilobar distribution, and size of the lesion(s), did not show significant correlation with p53 status. These results suggest that p53 status might be an important prognostic indicator to predict the pattern and likelihood of treatment failure after hepatic resection.

16492929
Breast and ovarian cancer in relatives of cancer patients, with and without BRCA mutations.
BACKGROUND: First-degree relatives of patients with breast or ovarian cancer have increased risks for these cancers. Little is known about how their risks vary with the patient's cancer site, carrier status for predisposing genetic mutations, or age at cancer diagnosis. METHODS: We evaluated breast and ovarian cancer incidence in 2,935 female first-degree relatives of non-Hispanic White female patients with incident invasive cancers of the breast (n = 669) or ovary (n = 339) who were recruited from a population-based cancer registry in northern California. Breast cancer patients were tested for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Ovarian cancer patients were tested for BRCA1 mutations. We estimated standardized incidence ratios (SIR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for breast and ovarian cancer among the relatives according to the patient's mutation status, cancer site, and age at cancer diagnosis. RESULTS: In families of patients who were negative or untested for BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, risks were elevated only for the patient's cancer site. The breast cancer SIR was 1.5 (95% CI, 1.2-1.8) for relatives of breast cancer patients, compared with 1.1 (95% CI, 0.8-1.6) for relatives of ovarian cancer patients (P = 0.12 for difference by patient's cancer site). The ovarian cancer SIR was 0.9 (95% CI, 0.5-1.4) for relatives of breast cancer patients, compared with 1.9 (95% CI, 1.0-4.0) for relatives of ovarian cancer patients (P = 0.04 for difference by site). In families of BRCA1-positive patients, relatives' risks also correlated with the patient's cancer site. The breast cancer SIR was 10.6 (95% CI, 5.2-21.6) for relatives of breast cancer patients, compared with 3.3 (95% CI, 1.4-7.3) for relatives of ovarian cancer patients (two-sided P = 0.02 for difference by site). The ovarian cancer SIR was 7.9 (95% CI, 1.2-53.0) for relatives of breast cancer patients, compared with 11.3 (3.6-35.9) for relatives of ovarian cancer patients (two-sided P = 0.37 for difference by site). Relatives' risks were independent of patients' ages at diagnosis, with one exception: In families ascertained through a breast cancer patient without BRCA mutations, breast cancer risks were higher if the patient had been diagnosed before age 40 years. CONCLUSION: In families of patients with and without BRCA1 mutations, breast and ovarian cancer risks correlate with the patient's cancer site. Moreover, in families of breast cancer patients without BRCA mutations, breast cancer risk depends on the patient's age at diagnosis. These patterns support the presence of genes that modify risk specific to cancer site, in both carriers and noncarriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.

17945002
Implication of BRCA2 -26G>A 5' untranslated region polymorphism in susceptibility to sporadic breast cancer and its modulation by p53 codon 72 Arg>Pro polymorphism.
INTRODUCTION: The absence of mutation or promoter hypermethylation in the BRCA2 gene in the majority of breast cancer cases has indicated alternative ways of its involvement, deregulated expression being one possibility. We show how a polymorphism in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of BRCA2 can serve as one such factor. Based on the hypothesis that variants of genes involved in the same pathway can influence the risk provided for breast cancer, the status of p53 codon 72 polymorphism was also investigated and a possible interaction between the polymorphisms was examined. METHODS: The luciferase reporter assay followed by RNA secondary structure analysis was used for the functional characterization of -26 5' UTR G>A polymorphism in BRCA2. The genotype and the allele frequency for the polymorphisms were determined and relative risk adjusted for age was calculated in a case-control study of 576 individuals (243 patients and 333 controls) from north India. RESULTS: -26 G>A polymorphism in the 5' UTR of BRCA2 was found to be functional whereby the A allele increased the reporter gene expression by twice that of the G allele in MCF-7 (P = 0.003) and HeLa (P = 0.013) cells. RNA secondary structure analysis by two different programs predicted the A allele to alter the stability of a loop in the vicinity of the translation start site. Its direct implication in breast cancer became evident by a case-control study in which the heterozygous genotype was found to be protective in nature (P heterozygote advantage model = 0.0005, odds ratio [OR] = 0.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.4 to 0.8), which was further supported by trends observed in a genomic instability study. The p53 codon 72 Arg homozygous genotype was found to be over-represented in patients (P = 0.0005, OR = 2.3, 95% CI = 1.4 to 3.6). The interaction study indicated an increased protection under simultaneous presence of protector genotypes of both the polymorphic loci (P = 0.0001, OR = 0.2, 95% CI = 0.1 to 0.4). CONCLUSION: Our study shows that -26 5' UTR polymorphism in BRCA2 can modulate the fine-tuned regulation of the multifunctional gene BRCA2 and renders risk or protection according to the genotype status in the sporadic form of breast cancer, which is further influenced by the germline genetic backgrounds of codon 72 polymorphism of p53.

10089074
Germline mutations of the p53 gene in children with malignant solid tumors.
Although somatic mutations of p53 are the most common genetic changes observed to date, the frequency of germline p53 mutations is found to be very low in sporadic malignant tumors. It has been postulated that de novo germline p53 mutations may occur in a substantial population of patients in pediatric age group, who die of their disease and do not propagate the mutation. To determine the frequency and type of p53 germline mutations in pediatric patients, we screened 65 children who were consecutively admitted with primary malignant solid tumors.

12200603
p53 Germline mutation in a patient with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and three metachronous malignancies.
PURPOSE: Germline mutations of the p53 coding region are present in approximately 50-70% of patients with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS), a rare hereditary disorder of familial and intraindividual clustering of different malignancies such as sarcoma (index tumor), breast cancer, brain tumors, leukemias, and adrenocortical carcinomas, the latter usually in young children. Both onset and spectrum of malignancies in individuals with LFS are thus heterogenous and may, less frequently, also include other epithelial and mesenchymal tumors. A 32-year-old female presented for genetic counseling with a history of leiomyosarcoma at age 22, malignant melanoma (a rare component of LFS) at age 26, and breast cancer at age 30. All three tumors had been treated surgically. Astrocytoma and breast cancer, respectively, had been diagnosed in her brother and mother before age 30. Other malignancies diagnosed early in life in relatives of the mother were: prostate cancer, stomach cancer, and carcinoma of the larynx. METHODS: Upon written informed consent, DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the proband, and p53 exons 4-8 analyzed for mutations by SSCP and DNA sequencing. RESULTS: A G:C to A:T mutation at codon 175 of p53 resulting in an arginine --> histidine substitution was detected, confirming the clinical diagnosis of LFS. CONCLUSIONS: The patient and her family are being followed further, but testing of her children for the presence of this mutation is currently being withheld. The difficulties in the management and treatment of patients with this clinically heterogenous disorder are discussed.

1642235
Segregation analysis of cancer in families of childhood soft-tissue-sarcoma patients.
This paper presents the analysis of familial cancer data collected in a hospital-based study of 159 childhood soft-tissue-sarcoma patients. Two different statistical models detected excess aggregation of cancer, which could be explained by a rare dominant gene. For each kindred, we estimated the probability of the observed cancer distribution under the dominant-gene model and identified 12 families that are the most likely to be segregating the gene. Two of those families have confirmed germ-line mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene. The relative risk of affection for children who are gene carriers was estimated to be 100 times the background rate. Females were found to have a slightly higher age-specific penetrance, but maternal and paternal lineages made equal contributions to the evidence in favor of the dominant gene. The proband's histology, ethnicity, and age at diagnosis were evaluated to determine whether any of these altered the probability of affection in family members. Only embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma was found to be a significant covariate under the dominant-gene model. While molecular genetic studies of familial cancer will eventually provide answers to the questions of genetic heterogeneity, age- and site-specific penetrance, mutation rates, and gene frequency, information from statistical models is useful for setting priorities and defining hypotheses.

25927356
Identification of a comprehensive spectrum of genetic factors for hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population by next-generation sequencing.
The genetic etiology of hereditary breast cancer has not been fully elucidated. Although germline mutations of high-penetrance genes such as BRCA1/2 are implicated in development of hereditary breast cancers, at least half of all breast cancer families are not linked to these genes. To identify a comprehensive spectrum of genetic factors for hereditary breast cancer in a Chinese population, we performed an analysis of germline mutations in 2,165 coding exons of 152 genes associated with hereditary cancer using next-generation sequencing (NGS) in 99 breast cancer patients from families of cancer patients regardless of cancer types. Forty-two deleterious germline mutations were identified in 21 genes of 34 patients, including 18 (18.2%) BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, 3 (3%) TP53 mutations, 5 (5.1%) DNA mismatch repair gene mutations, 1 (1%) CDH1 mutation, 6 (6.1%) Fanconi anemia pathway gene mutations, and 9 (9.1%) mutations in other genes. Of seven patients who carried mutations in more than one gene, 4 were BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, and their average onset age was much younger than patients with only BRCA1/2 mutations. Almost all identified high-penetrance gene mutations in those families fulfill the typical phenotypes of hereditary cancer syndromes listed in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, except two TP53 and three mismatch repair gene mutations. Furthermore, functional studies of MSH3 germline mutations confirmed the association between MSH3 mutation and tumorigenesis, and segregation analysis suggested antagonism between BRCA1 and MSH3. We also identified a lot of low-penetrance gene mutations. Although the clinical significance of those newly identified low-penetrance gene mutations has not been fully appreciated yet, these new findings do provide valuable epidemiological information for the future studies. Together, these findings highlight the importance of genetic testing based on NCCN guidelines and a multi-gene analysis using NGS may be a supplement to traditional genetic counseling.

31119730
Prevalence and clinical impact of TP53 germline mutations in Chinese women with breast cancer.
The prevalence and clinical relevance of TP53 germline mutations in a large unselected breast cancer series are largely unknown. Here, we determined TP53 germline mutations in a large cohort of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients through multigene panel-based next-generation and/or Sanger sequencing assays. We found that 0.5% of patients (50 cases) carried a pathogenic TP53 germline mutation in this large series of 10,053 unselected breast cancer patients, and the prevalence of TP53 germline mutation was 3.8% in very early onset breast cancer (age 30years) in this large cohort. TP53 mutation carriers were significantly more likely to have early onset cancer (p<0.001) and bilateral breast cancer (p = 0.03), they and were significantly more likely to respond to carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy compared to anthracycline- or taxane-based regimen in terms of pathologic complete response (50% vs. 0%, p = 0.006). At the median follow-up of 54months, TP53 mutation was an independent unfavorable factor for recurrence-free survival (RFS), distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS), and overall survival (OS) (RFS, adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 2.24, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.15-4.33, p = 0.02; DRFS, adjusted HR: 2.73, 95% CI: 1.41-5.30, p = 0.003; OS, adjusted HR: 4.60, 95% CI: 2.26-9.41, p<0.001) in multivariate analyses. Our study suggested that TP53 germline mutations occur more frequently in very early onset unselected breast cancer patients; and TP53 germline mutation carriers have a very poor survival and may benefit from carboplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in unselected breast cancer patients.

12548593
Impact of germline BRCA1 mutations and overexpression of p53 on prognosis and response to treatment following breast carcinoma: 10-year follow up data.
BACKGROUND: Overexpression of p53 has been associated with poor survival following breast carcinoma. BRCA1 interacts biochemically with p53 and may also contribute to poor outcome when constitutionally mutated. The joint effect of both abnormalities has not been studied. The primary objective of this study was to assess the impact of germline BRCA1 mutations and p53 overexpression on survival after 10 years of follow-up. METHODS: A historical cohort of Ashkenazi Jewish women 65 years or younger with invasive breast carcinoma was tested for BRCA1 founder mutations. p53 overexpression was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Clinicopathologic information was obtained by chart review. RESULTS: In total, 278 women were analyzed. On univariate analysis, p53 overexpression (n = 63) was prognostic for worse overall survival (relative risk [RR] 2.6, P = 0.001) whereas BRCA1 germline mutations (n = 30) were of borderline significance (RR 1.9, P = 0.052). In the lymph node-negative subpopulation, BRCA1 mutation status conferred a higher mortality on univariate (RR 5.6, P < 0.001) and multivariate (RR 3.5, P = 0.03) analyses. There was a trend in favor of a worse prognosis for women who carried a germline BRCA1 mutation and whose tumor overexpressed p53. When compared with noncarriers, BRCA1 mutation carriers had a worse overall survival if they did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy (RR 3.3, P= 0.01) or adjuvant hormonal therapy (RR 2.3, P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Germline BRCA1 mutations and p53 overexpression carry a negative prognosis that is not additive to known prognostic factors. Given the experimental sensitivity of BRCA1-mutated cells to chemotherapy, the worse survival among BRCA1 mutation-carrying lymph node-negative breast carcinoma patients may be partly explained by the significantly lower proportion of lymph node-negative patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy (P < 0.001).

25584008
Prevalence and functional consequence of TP53 mutations in pediatric adrenocortical carcinoma: a children's oncology group study.
PURPOSE: Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare pediatric malignancy. It occurs in excess among individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which results primarily from germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Prior series exploring frequencies of germline TP53 mutation among children with ACC have been small, geographically limited, or subject to referral bias. The functional consequence of mutations has not been related to phenotype. We provide a genotype-phenotype analysis of TP53 mutations in pediatric ACC and propose a model for tissue-specific effects based on adrenocortical ontogeny. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty-eight consecutive, unrelated children with ACC, unselected for family history, underwent germline TP53 sequencing. Rate and distribution of mutations were identified. Functional analysis was performed for novel TP53 variants. Correlation with the International Agency for Research on Cancer p53 database further delineated mutational distribution, association with family history, and risk for multiple primary malignancies (MPMs). RESULTS: Germline mutations were present in 50% of children. These mutations did not correspond to the conventional hotspot mutations. There was a wide range of mutant protein function. Patients bearing alleles encoding protein with higher functionality were less likely to have a strong family cancer history, whereas those with greater loss of function had MPMs and/or positive family history. In patients with MPMs, ACC was the most frequent initial malignancy. Finally, we demonstrated age-dependent rates of TP53 mutation positivity. CONCLUSION: TP53 mutations are prevalent in children with ACC but decline with age. Mutations result in a broad spectrum of functional loss. Effect of individual mutations may predict carrier and familial disease penetrance with potentially broad implications for clinical surveillance and counseling.

30796655
Germline TP53 mutation spectrum in Sudanese premenopausal breast cancer patients: correlations with reproductive factors.
PURPOSE: The role of non-genetic factors as modifiers of TP53-related hereditary breast cancer (BC) risk is debated. In this regard, little is known about the impact of germline TP53 mutations on BC in sub-Saharan Africa, where the disease often presents in non-contraceptive multiparous premenopausal women with extended history of breastfeeding. Herein, we report the germline TP53 mutations found in a series of 92 Sudanese premenopausal BC patients characterized for reproductive history. METHODS: The entire TP53 coding sequence, including intron-exon boundaries and UTRs, was analyzed via DHPLC and direct sequencing, and the association of TP53 genotypes with BC risk and with individual lifetime exposures to reproductive factors was investigated with statistical tools. RESULTS: The germline TP53 mutation spectrum comprised 20 variants, 15 in the non-coding and 5 in the coding region. The latter included a deleterious missense mutation, c.817C>T (p.Arg273Cys), in a unique patient, and the common and functionally relevant coding polymorphism at amino acid 72 [Pro72Arg (rs1042522)]. The non-coding mutations included c.919+1G>A, a known deleterious splice site mutation, also in a unique patient. Notably, the 2 carriers of deleterious TP53 mutations clustered in the subset of cases with stronger reproductive history relative to childbearing age. When analyzed in comparison to population controls, the codon 72 polymorphism did not reveal associations with BC. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the codon 72 Arg>Pro polymorphism is not implicated in premenopausal BC susceptibility, whereas multiparity and breastfeeding might be BC risk factors for carriers of deleterious TP53 mutations.

17202110
Risk of soft tissue sarcomas by individual subtype in survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma.
BACKGROUND: Survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma have an increased risk for second malignancies, especially soft tissue sarcomas. However, the risks of individual histologic subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas have not been evaluated. METHODS: We estimated the risk for six subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas (fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma, histiocytoma, leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and others) in a cohort of 963 one-year survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma among patients diagnosed at two US institutions from 1914 through 1984. We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) for specific subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas by comparison with population data from the Connecticut Tumor Registry or from National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database. We also calculated the cumulative risk for all soft tissue sarcomas combined. RESULTS: We observed 69 soft tissue sarcomas in 68 patients with hereditary retinoblastoma. Risks were elevated for soft tissue sarcomas overall (SIR = 184, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 143 to 233) and for individual subtypes. Leiomyosarcoma was the most frequent subtype (SIR = 390, 95% CI = 247 to 585), with 78% of leiomyosarcomas diagnosed 30 or more years after the retinoblastoma diagnosis (SIR = 435, 95% CI = 258 to 687). Among patients treated with radiotherapy for retinoblastoma, we found statistically significantly increased risks of soft tissue sarcomas in the field of radiation. Irradiated patients also had increased risks of soft tissue sarcomas, especially leiomyosarcomas, outside the field of radiation, and risks of soft tissue sarcomas were increased in nonirradiated patients as well, indicating a genetic predisposition to soft tissue sarcomas independent of radiation. The cumulative risk for any soft tissue sarcoma 50 years after radiotherapy for retinoblastoma was 13.1% (95% CI = 9.7% to 17.0%). CONCLUSION: Long-term follow-up of a cohort of survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma revealed a statistically significant excess of leiomyosarcoma and other soft tissue sarcomas that persists decades after the retinoblastoma diagnosis. Retinoblastoma survivors should undergo regular medical surveillance for sarcomas in their adult years.

18989156
Germline p53 mutation in a Micronesian child with adrenocortical carcinoma and subsequent osteosarcoma.
In 1990, an 18-month-old Micronesian girl was initially diagnosed with a right adrenocortical carcinoma. More than a decade later (2003), she was diagnosed with metastatic osteosarcoma with the primary in her right proximal fibula. Given this child's remarkable history of malignancy, she underwent testing for a genetic mutation that is associated with increased cancer formation. One such cancer syndrome is called Li-Fraumeni syndrome where approximately 70% of patients carry a genetic mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Patients with LFS are at risk for developing cancers of the breast, soft tissues, brain, bone, adrenal gland, and blood cells. Mutational analysis of our patient did reveal the presence of a germline mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. She was found to have a base pair change (A-->C) at nucleotide 394 resulting in a lysine to glutamine amino acid change at codon 132 (K132Q), which remarkably has never been described in association with either adrenocortical carcinoma or osteosarcoma.

8134127
Two germ-line mutations affecting the same nucleotide at codon 257 of p53 gene, a rare site for mutations.
Codon 257 of the p53 gene is an extremely rare target for somatic mutations (accounting for only two of 1600 published mutations). We report here two constitutional mutations both affecting the second nucleotide of codon 257. A thymine to adenine transversion resulting in an amino acid change from leucine to glutamine was found in one proband who developed multiple independent malignant tumors (osteosarcoma, phyllodes tumor, soft-tissue sarcoma). Her mother died of early-onset breast cancer. In the other case, a deletion resulting in a frameshift in the C-terminal coding region of p53 was found in a woman who was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 34. This woman belongs to a family with features of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In both cases, the p53 mutations identified in the proband was found in other members of the family. Codon 257, even if rarely mutated in somatic cells, may thus be an important target for germ-line mutations.

12606942
Detailed computational study of p53 and p16: using evolutionary sequence analysis and disease-associated mutations to predict the functional consequences of allelic variants.
Deciding whether a missense allelic variant affects protein function is important in many contexts. We previously demonstrated that a detailed analysis of p53 intragenic conservation correlates with somatic mutation hotspots. Here we refine these evolutionary studies and expand them to the p16/Ink4a gene. We calculated that in order for 'absolute conservation' of a codon across multiple species to achieve P<0.05, the evolutionary substitution database must contain at least 3(M) variants, where M equals the number of codons in the gene. Codons in p53 were divided into high (73% of codons), intermediate (29% of codons), and low (0 codons) likelihood of being mutation hotspots. From a database of 263 somatic missense p16 mutations, we identified only four codons that are mutational hotspots at P<0.05 (8 mutations). However, data on function, structure, and disease association support the conclusion that 11 other codons with > or =5 somatic mutations also likely indicate functionally critical residues, even though P0.05. We calculated p16 evolution using amino acid substitution matrices and nucleotide substitution distances. We looked for evolutionary parameters at each codon that would predict whether missense mutations were disease associated or disrupted function. The current p16 evolutionary substitution database is too small to determine whether observations of 'absolute conservation' are statistically significant. Increasing the number of sequences from three to seven significantly improved the predictive value of evolutionary computations. The sensitivity and specificity for conservation scores in predicting disease association of p16 codons is 70-80%. Despite the small p16 sequence database, our calculations of high conservation correctly predicted loss of cell cycle arrest function in 75% of tested codons, and low conservation correctly predicted wild-type function in 80-90% of codons. These data validate our hypothesis that detailed evolutionary analyses help predict the consequences of missense amino-acid variants.

17624602
BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, and CDKN2A germline mutations in patients with breast cancer and cutaneous melanoma.
PURPOSE: From epidemiological studies it appears that breast cancer (BC) and cutaneous melanoma (CMM) in the same individual occur at a higher frequency than expected by chance. Genetic factors common to both cancers can be suspected. Our goal was to estimate the involvement of "high risk" genes in patients presenting these two neoplasia, selected irrespectively from family history and age at diagnosis. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Eighty two patients with BC and CMM were screened for BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, CDKN2A and CDK4 (exon 2) germline mutations. RESULTS: Deleterious mutations were identified in 6 patients: two carriers of a BRCA1 germline mutation, two carriers of TP53 germline mutations (one of which also harbored a BRCA2 deleterious mutation, the other one a BRCA2 unclassified variant), and two carriers of a CDKN2A germline mutation. In addition, 6 variants of unknown signification were identified in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Regarding family history, 3/13 (23%) patients with a positive family history of BC or CMM were carriers of a germline mutation, whereas only 3/69 (4%) patients without family history were carriers of a germline mutation. CONCLUSION: Our findings show that few patients with BC and CMM who lacked family histories of these cancers are carriers of deleterious germline mutations in four of the five genes we examined. We describe for the first time, two simultaneous BRCA2 and TP53 mutations, suggesting that analysis in more than one gene could be performed if a patient's personal or familial history does not match a single syndrome.

11179017
Prevalence and penetrance of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population series of 649 women with ovarian cancer.
A population-based series of 649 unselected incident cases of ovarian cancer diagnosed in Ontario, Canada, during 1995-96 was screened for germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2. We specifically tested for 11 of the most commonly reported mutations in the two genes. Then, cases were assessed with the protein-truncation test (PTT) for exon 11 of BRCA1, with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis for the remainder of BRCA1, and with PTT for exons 10 and 11 of BRCA2. No mutations were found in all 134 women with tumors of borderline histology. Among the 515 women with invasive cancers, we identified 60 mutations, 39 in BRCA1 and 21 in BRCA2. The total mutation frequency among women with invasive cancers, 11.7% (95% confidence interval [95%CI] 9.2%-14.8%), is higher than previous estimates. Hereditary ovarian cancers diagnosed at age <50 years were mostly (83%) due to BRCA1, whereas the majority (60%) of those diagnosed at age >60 years were due to BRCA2. Mutations were found in 19% of women reporting first-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer and in 6.5% of women with no affected first-degree relatives. Risks of ovarian, breast, and stomach cancers and leukemias/lymphomas were increased nine-, five-, six- and threefold, respectively, among first-degree relatives of cases carrying BRCA1 mutations, compared with relatives of noncarriers, and risk of colorectal cancer was increased threefold for relatives of cases carrying BRCA2 mutations. For carriers of BRCA1 mutations, the estimated penetrance by age 80 years was 36% for ovarian cancer and 68% for breast cancer. In breast-cancer risk for first-degree relatives, there was a strong trend according to mutation location along the coding sequence of BRCA1, with little evidence of increased risk for mutations in the 5' fifth, but 8.8-fold increased risk for mutations in the 3' fifth (95%CI 3.6-22.0), corresponding to a carrier penetrance of essentially 100%. Ovarian, colorectal, stomach, pancreatic, and prostate cancer occurred among first-degree relatives of carriers of BRCA2 mutations only when mutations were in the ovarian cancer-cluster region (OCCR) of exon 11, whereas an excess of breast cancer was seen when mutations were outside the OCCR. For cancers of all sites combined, the estimated penetrance of BRCA2 mutations was greater for males than for females, 53% versus 38%. Past studies may have underestimated the contribution of BRCA2 to ovarian cancer, because mutations in this gene cause predominantly late-onset cancer, and previous work has focused more on early-onset disease. If confirmed in future studies, the trend in breast-cancer penetrance, according to mutation location along the BRCA1 coding sequence, may have significant impact on treatment decisions for carriers of BRCA1-mutations. As well, BRCA2 mutations may prove to be a greater cause of cancer in male carriers than previously has been thought.

32447321
Integrated case-control and somatic-germline interaction analyses of soft-tissue sarcoma.
PURPOSE: The contribution of rare genetic variation in the development of soft-tissue sarcoma (STS) remains underexplored. To address this gap, we conducted a whole-exome case-control and somatic-germline interaction study to identify and characterise STS susceptible genes. METHODS: The study involved 219 STS cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas and 3507 controls. All cases and controls were matched genetically onEuropean ancestry based on the 1000 Genomes project. Cross-platform technological stratification was performed with XPAT and gene-based association tests with VAAST 2. RESULTS: NF1 exhibited the strongest genome-wide signal across the six subtypes, with p=110(-5). We also observed nominally significant association signals for three additional genes of interest, TP53 (p=0.0025), RB1 (p=0.0281), and MSH2 (p=0.0085). BAG1, which has not previously been implicated in STS, exhibited the strongest genome-wide signal after NF1, with p=610(-5). The association signals for NF1 and MSH2 were driven primarily by truncating variants, with ORs of 39 (95% CI: 7.1 to 220) for NF1 and 33 (95% CI: 2.4 to 460) for MSH2. In contrast, the association signals for RB1 and BAG1 were driven primarily by predicted damaging missense variants, with estimated ORs of 12 (95% CI: 2.4 to 59) for RB1 and 20 (95% CI: 1.4 to 300) for BAG1. CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm that pathogenic variants in NF1, RB1 and TP53 confer large increases in the risk of developing multiple STS subtypes, provide support for the role of MSH2 in STS susceptibility and identify BAG1 as a novel candidate STS risk gene.

20039063
Effects of measured susceptibility genes on cancer risk in family studies.
Numerous family studies have been performed to assess the associations between cancer incidence and genetic and non-genetic risk factors and to quantitatively evaluate the cancer risk attributable to these factors. However, mathematical models that account for a measured hereditary susceptibility gene have not been fully explored in family studies. In this report, we proposed statistical approaches to precisely model a measured susceptibility gene fitted to family data and simultaneously determine the combined effects of individual risk factors and their interactions. Our approaches are structured for age-specific risk models based on Cox proportional hazards regression methods. They are useful for analyses of families and extended pedigrees in which measured risk genotypes are segregated within the family and are robust even when the genotypes are available only in some members of a family. We exemplified these methods by analyzing six extended pedigrees ascertained through soft-tissue sarcoma patients with p53 germ-line mutations. Our analyses showed that germ-line p53 mutations and sex had significant interaction effects on cancer risk. Our proposed methods in family studies are accurate and robust for assessing age-specific cancer risk attributable to a measured hereditary susceptibility gene, providing valuable inferences for genetic counseling and clinical management.

18398474
An information-theoretic analysis of genetics, gender and age in cancer patients.
Germline genetics, gender and hormonal-signaling pathways are all well described modifiers of cancer risk and progression. Although an improved understanding of how germline genetic variants interact with other cancer risk factors may allow better prevention and treatment of human cancer, measuring and quantifying these interactions is challenging. In other areas of research, Information Theory has been used to quantitatively describe similar multivariate interactions. We implemented a novel information-theoretic analysis to measure the joint effect of a high frequency germline genetic variant of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway (MDM2 SNP309 T/G) and gender on clinical cancer phenotypes. This analysis quantitatively describes synergistic interactions among gender, the MDM2 SNP309 locus, and the age of onset of tumorigenesis in p53 mutation carriers. These results offer a molecular and genetic basis for the observed sexual dimorphism of cancer risk in p53 mutation carriers and a model is proposed that suggests a novel cancer prevention strategy for p53 mutation carriers.

